TECH REPORT: bcg_ai_value_2025
SOURCE: bcg_ai_value_2025.pdf
============================================================

## KEY SECTIONS ##

### METHODOLOGY ###
approach aimed at benefiting all stakeholders—empowering 
organizations to grow, build sustainable competitive 
advantage, and drive positive societal impact.
Our diverse, global teams bring deep industry and functional 
expertise and a range of perspectives that question the 
status quo and spark change. BCG delivers solutions 
through leading-edge management consulting, technology 
and design, and corporate and digital ventures. We work 
in a uniquely collaborative model across the firm and 
throughout all levels of the client organization, fueled by 
the goal of helping our clients thrive and enabling them to 
make the world a better place.For information or permission to reprint, please contact 
BCG at permissions@bcg.com. To find the latest BCG 
content and register to receive e-alerts on this topic or 
others, please visit bcg.com. Follow Boston Consulting 
Group on LinkedIn , Facebook , and X (formerly Twitter) .
© Boston Consulting Group 2025. All rights reserved. 9/25

--------------------------------------------------

### INTRODUCTION ###
function or across functions. In the context of AI, 
companies are increasingly reimagining workflows end-to-
end, with agents and automation taking over routine steps 
while humans provide orchestration, judgment, and 
oversight. Workflows are the core unit of value creation in 
AI transformations, as they determine how efficiently and 
effectively work gets done across the enterprise.

--------------------------------------------------

### VALUE GAP ANALYSIS ###
BOSTON CONSULTING GROUPTHE WIDENING AI VALUE GAP 22

Djon Kleine is a managing director and partner in 
BCG’s Los Angeles office. You may contact him by email 
at kleine.djon@bcg.com .

Vladimir Lukic is a managing director and senior partner 
in BCG’s Boston office and is the global leader of the firm's 
Tech and Digital Advantage practice. You may contact him 
by email at lukic.vladimir@bcg.com .

Mary Martin is a managing director and senior partner 
in BCG’s Denver office. You may contact her by email 
at martin.mary@bcg.com .

Christoph Schweizer is CEO of Boston Consulting Group. 
For Further Contact
If you would like to discuss this report, please contact 
the authors.

Romain de Laubier is a managing director and senior 
partner in the firm’s Singapore office. You may contact him 
by email at delaubier.romain@bcg.com .

Amanda Luther is a managing director and senior 
partner in the firm’s Austin office. You may contact her by 
email at luther.amanda@bcg.com . 

Jeff Walters is a managing director and senior partner in 
the firm’s Hong Kong office. You may contact him by email 
at walters.jeff@bcg.com .
Acknowledgments
The authors extend their gratitude to everyone who 
contributed to the research and development of this report, 
including Charles Adamo, Florence Adida, Julie Bedard, 
Giuseppe Colombo, Maunoir de Kerros, Cyprien d’Harcourt, 
Anna Dorkel, Camille Duranton, Eva Engelhardt, Caroline 
Girard, Rim Hachani, Matthew Kropp, Nikolaus Lang, 
Michael Leyh, Deborah Lovich, Clemens Nopp, Lucas 
Quarta, Clémentine Remy, Lee Robertson, and Jürgen Rogg.
Boston Consulting Group partners with leaders in business 
and society to tackle their most important challenges and 
capture their greatest opportunities. BCG was the pioneer 
in business strategy when it was founded in 1963. Today, 
we work closely with clients to embrace a transformational 

--------------------------------------------------

### SECTOR ANALYSIS ###
Regional differences are subtle. North America tends to be 
slightly ahead on most adoption metrics. Asia-Pacific 
follows, with Europe somewhat farther behind, though all 

--------------------------------------------------

### IMPLEMENTATION FRAMEWORK ###
Accordingly, we built our comprehensive AI maturity score 
on 41 foundational capabilities, each measured along four 

--------------------------------------------------

### APPENDIX ###
scaling, and future-built. Appendix
BOSTON CONSULTING GROUPTHE WIDENING AI VALUE GAP 20Next, we sorted the weighted scores into four numerical 
ranges:

--------------------------------------------------

### AI DEFINITIONS ###
AI Value Realization Pathways
• Deploying. Boosting efficiency with GenAI tools (for 
example, in code generation, invoice reconciliation, and 
meeting summaries)
• Reshaping. Transforming core business workflows (for 
example, marketing, supply chain, and customer service) 
for productivity, quality, and speed
• Inventing. Creating AI-native offerings that unlock 

--------------------------------------------------

### RESEARCH FINDINGS ###
internal customization. Our research shows that only 11% 
of firms rely primarily on in-house development, and just 
4% depend on a single, end-to-end vendor for their full AI 
stack. However, buying solutions everywhere without 
prioritization risks fragmentation and poor adoption.
Clear principles guide the hybrid portfolio strategy. Smart 
companies focus on core enablers such as data readiness 
and internal skills—platform-agnostic investments that 
deliver sustained value. It is also essential to treat the 
ownership of models and prompts as a strategic lever and 
to make conscious choices about when to adopt, adapt, or 
assemble solutions to maintain control and differentiation.
A consistent platform strategy ties these technology 

--------------------------------------------------

### EXHIBITS DATA ###
EXHIBIT 10
Most AI Roadblocks Involve People, Organization, and ProcessesSource: BCG analysis.
Source: BCG Build for the Future 2025 Global Study (n = 1,250).Pursue a multiyear
strategic ambition
Reshape and invent
with impact
Implement an AI-ﬁrst

--------------------------------------------------

### REFERENCES ###
in-house and external resources to boost the successful use 
of large-scale partnerships. Indeed, the rapidly maturing 
supplier ecosystem— including maturing language models 
and more agentic AI offers by function and sector from 
hyperscalers, platform companies, and a plethora of AI-
native application providers—should give executives at 

--------------------------------------------------

### CASE STUDIES EXAMPLES ###
Financial metrics (for example, TSR and EBIT) are sourced 
via CapitalIQ and Orbis. Overall company performance has 
multiple drivers beyond AI.
We applied multivariate statistical methods such as 
random forest, logistic regression, and structural equation 
modeling (partial least squares regression) to calculate 
regression weights.
1,250 Responses Covering All Regions and Industries, as Well as a 
Wide Range of Company Sizes and Executive Positions
Source: BCG Build for the Future 2025 Global Study (n = 1,250).
Note: B = billion. 
1Europe includes data points from Africa and South America.37%
North
AmericaRegions
Revenue (%)40%
Europe123%
Asia-Paciﬁc
< $1B42
$1B–
$9.9B23
$10B–
$24.9B12
$25B–
$49.9B13
>$50BC-level (e.g., CEO, CIO, CTO, CFO)266
42Executive position (e.g., vice president)
Function or division leader or equivalent 
Others
Technology, media, and
telecommunicationsTravel, cities, and infrastructurePublic sectorInsuranceIndustrial goodsHealth careFinancial servicesEnergyConsumer goods
171167171012713Proﬁle of respondents (%)
Industries (%) 

--------------------------------------------------

## FULL REPORT CONTENT ##

The Widening AI Value Gap
Build for the Future 2025 
September 2025 
By Jessica Apotheker, Vinciane Beauchene, Nicolas de Bellefonds, Patrick Forth, Marc Roman Franke, Michael Grebe, 
Nina Kataeva, Santeri Kirvelä, Djon Kleine, Romain de Laubier, Vladimir Lukic, Amanda Luther, Mary Martin, 
Jeff Walters, and Christoph Schweizer
Contents03 Are You Generating Value from AI?
• Critical Capabilities
• Future-Built Strategies
05 AI Value Generators Are Pulling Away
• The Expanding Value Gap
• Value from the Core
• On Come Agents
• Agents Do Not Work Alone
• Sidebar: AI Maturity Varies by Sector and Region
11 What Value Generators Do Differently
• Pursue a Multiyear Strategic AI Ambition
• Reshape and Invent with Impact
• Adopt an AI-First Operating Model
• Secure and Enable the Necessary Talent 
• Use Fit-for-Purpose Technology and Data
17 How to Accelerate AI Value Creation
19 Appendix
• AI Definitions
• Survey Methodology
BOSTON CONSULTING GROUPTHE WIDENING AI VALUE GAP 3
How much value is your company generating from your investments 
in AI? It’s a question more CEOs, boards, and investors are asking. 
More often than not, the answer is not encouraging.
BCG’s latest research provides empirical proof that for a 
small number of companies AI is delivering significant 
bottom-line value in the form of revenue and cash flow 
increases and process and workflow improvements. The 
impact is sufficient to drive shareholder returns. But this 
typically does not happen. Only 5% of companies in our 
2025 study of more than 1,250 firms worldwide are 
achieving AI value at scale—a measure of how tough the 
full AI transformation is. Fully 60% of companies are not 
achieving material value at all, reporting minimal revenue 
and cost gains despite substantial investment. Another 
35% (13 percentage points more than in 2024) are scaling 
up their efforts and seeing some returns, but many of them 
admit that they are not moving far enough or fast enough. 
(See Exhibit 1.)
Critical Capabilities
The difference is that the top 5% of companies, which we 
call future-built, have put in place the critical capabilities 
needed to make AI work at the level of innovation and 
reinvention as well as to boost efficiencies. Not only are 
these companies outperforming the competition, but they 
have also opened a value gap and are pulling further ahead 
as they reinvest the proceeds from their earlier success in 
new capabilities, tools, and innovations. Future-built 
companies are achieving a transformative effect on value 
creation by catalyzing better decisions and faster and more 
efficient actions, targeting step changes that go far beyond 
what is possible from automation and productivity increases. Much of this value is concentrated in core business functions, 
such as R&D, sales and marketing, and manufacturing, as 
well as in IT, where the expected value potential in multiple 
areas increased substantially over expectations in our 2024 
report, Where’s the Value in AI? The biggest value 
comes from client-related functions and IT.
All of this is happening much more rapidly than previous 
digital disruptions did, and it will continue to do so as AI’s 
functionality improves. Agentic AI, which combines 
predictive and generative capabilities to reason, learn, and 
act autonomously, promises to be the biggest accelerator 
of the widening value gap. Agents, hardly spoken of at all in 
2024, already account for 17% of total AI value in 2025 and 
are expected to reach 29% by 2028.
Future-Built Strategies
Future-built companies are distinguished by five interlinked 
strategies that we identified in last year’s report, starting 
with strong leadership and a clear and ambitious vision. 
They recognize the massive opportunity to drive a top-
down multiyear agenda, they define their AI programs with 
ambitious cost and revenue targets from top management, 
and they mandate near-term bottom-line improvements 
while developing new skills, workflows, and technology that 
will fuel their success for years to come. Are You Generating Value from AI?
BOSTON CONSULTING GROUPTHE WIDENING AI VALUE GAP 4Future-built firms go well beyond automation and 
incremental productivity improvements to reshape current 
workflows and invent new ones. They prioritize the latest 
advances, such as generative AI (GenAI) and agentic AI, to 
create new revenue streams. Big value comes not from AI 
pilots or isolated use cases, but from reshaping and 
reinventing core business workflows end-to-end.
Future-built firms have adopted an AI-first approach and 
installed and achieved organizational buy-in for an AI-first 
operating model that combines strong leadership with 
decentralized execution and shared ownership between 
business and IT. They are moving toward hybrid workflows 
based on human–AI collaboration supported by necessary 
upskilling, governance guardrails, and partnerships. They 
aggressively source or train the talent they need, now and for the future, especially through broad-based upskilling of 
current staff (more than 50% of the internal workforce). They 
also build out a flexible, modular, and interoperable 
technology stack and a data foundation that leverage central 
AI platforms, reusable agents, interoperable architectures, 
and governed access to trusted enterprise data.
The good news for other companies is that the playbook 
that these future-built firms follow is clearly delineated and 
available to all. It’s a roadmap that the other 95% can use 
to build AI maturity and achieve value at scale. But these 
trailing firms, especially the 60% that have little or no value 
to show for their investment in AI so far, need to move fast 
or risk being left in the wake of this latest powerful wave of 
digital disruption.EXHIBIT 1
Only 5% of Companies Get Substantial Value from AI, While 60% Lag 
in Developing Critical AI Capabilities
Source: BCG Build for the Future 2025 Global Study (n = 1,250). 
1This score assesses AI maturity across 41 dimensions. 
2Future-built versus stagnating + emerging. 
3External metrics (Capital IQ): total shareholder return (June 22–May 25 for three-year TSR).Share of companies
Cumulative share
of companiesLaggards
Stagnating Emerging Scaling Future-built
0 25 50 75 100
Are taking minimal 
or no AI action, lack 
foundational 
capabilities, and are 
not generating valueHave developed 
foundational 
capabilities and 
started initial 
experimentation 
but are struggling 
to scale and 
generate valueHave developed
an AI strategy and 
advanced 
capabilities, and 
are scaling them 
eﬀectively while 
starting to 
generate valueAre at the forefront
of AI innovation, 
systematically building 
cutting-edge AI 
capabilities across 
functions and 
consistently generating 
substantial value2025 14% 46% 35% 5%
2025 average
BFFxAI 2025
maturity score12024 average25% 49% 22% 4%Value achieved
by future-built2
Revenue growth 1.7x
Three-year TSR3 3.6x
Return on
invested capital 2.7x
EBIT margin 1.6x
Patents 3.5x
BOSTON CONSULTING GROUPTHE WIDENING AI VALUE GAP 5
The goal of AI, of course, is to create business value. Such 
value has been elusive until recently, leading to skepticism 
among executives about the importance of the technology 
to their companies and among investors about whether the 
immense investments being made in AI (more than $250 
billion in 2024 alone, according to Stanford University) will 
pay off by driving higher corporate usage.
But our research indicates that for the best companies, 
value is achievable and substantial. Future-built companies 
already generate 1.7 times more revenue growth and 1.6 
times higher EBIT margins than the 60% of companies in 
the categories we term stagnating or emerging. The AI 
portfolio of initiatives at one large multiformat retailer has 
produced cost, margin, and revenue impacts of hundreds 
of millions of dollars over the past five years, adding more 
than 10% to the company EBITDA today. A company 
executive told us, “The investor community sees this, as we 
do, as a strategically important driver of value.”The Expanding Value Gap
AI-driven value accrues over time, creating a compounding 
effect. (See Exhibit 2.) Future-built companies that moved 
early enjoy outsized benefits across financial and 
operational fronts, and this performance gap is widening. 
Future-built firms plan to spend 26% more on IT 
(representing almost a full percentage point of revenue) 
and dedicate up to 64% more of their IT budget to AI in 
2025. As a result of this investment, they expect twice the 
revenue increase and 1.4 times greater cost reductions 
than laggards in the areas where they apply AI.
This creates a cycle that is virtuous for some and vicious for 
others. In the latter camp are companies that started to 
experiment but struggled to scale and generate value (the 
46% we call emerging) and stagnating companies that have 
taken little or no action (the remaining 14%). We refer to all 
of these companies collectively as laggards; about a third 
admit that they have made no progress. (See “AI 
Definitions” in the appendix.) As future-built companies 
reinvest their AI returns in stronger people and additional 
tech capabilities, they accelerate value creation. Laggards, 
which lack foundational capabilities and generate almost no 
value, risk being locked into a vicious cycle of losing ground.AI Value Generators Are Pulling Away
BOSTON CONSULTING GROUPTHE WIDENING AI VALUE GAP 6Our research and client experience finds plenty of reasons 
for lack of progress. One of the biggest is lack of top 
management commitment. Among laggards, top 
management may talk the talk, but it fails to articulate any 
clear value ambition and doesn’t put in place a program to 
track progress regularly. It delegates AI to people in middle 
or lower management, who are unsure what to do or are 
fearful of the technology’s future impact on them. Some 
company leaders move slowly because they worry about 
adverse impacts, such as poor customer experience. 
Others are told by operational management that they are 
already using AI in many places and the value will come if 
the leaders are patient. Still others experiment too widely, 
spreading their resources over scores of complex workflows 
and automating processes here and there, instead of 
focusing end-to-end on a few important functions or 
workflows that can generate value and illustrate the 
benefits of scale. The outcome is often a proliferation of 
disconnected initiatives that consume resources without 
generating coordinated value.In the end, too many companies have approached AI too 
incrementally, as a way to do more of the same a little faster 
or better, when the need is for strategic reinvention: What 
matters to my customers and differentiates my business? 
How will AI and agents change how I deliver those 
outcomes? Where do humans still have the biggest impact?
Value from the Core
Our research has found that 70% of potential value from AI 
is concentrated in core business functions such as sales 
and marketing, manufacturing, supply chain, and pricing. 
R&D and innovation alone account for 15% of the total 
potential value. This continues a trend that we identified in 
our 2024 report , which reported that 62% of value came 
from core business functions.
The big exception is IT, whose share of AI value jumped by 
6 percentage points to 13% in 2025. (See Exhibit 3 and 
the sidebar, “AI Maturity Varies by Sector and Region.”)EXHIBIT 2
Future-Built Companies Create a Virtuous Cycle by Higher Spending 
on IT and Reinvestment of Gains from AI
Source: BCG Build for the Future 2025 Global Study (n = 1,250).
Note: Results reflect the business area respondents know best, not always the full company. Revenue increase and cost reduction are calculated as a 
percentage of annual revenue through AI efficiency gains in areas where AI is applied.…fueling higher
investments… 2024Higher
value realized 2028Higher
value expected
1.2%6.8%14.2%13.6%
9.6%
 6.2%5.3x
Revenue
increaseRevenue
increaseCost
reductionCost
reduction 6.0%
2.0%2.1x 1.4x
3.0xAverage global share
of IT budget for AI 5%
Future-built vs laggards
•Higher spending on IT +26%
•Higher share from IT
budget for AI +64%
•Overall higher
investment of future-built
companies in AI+120%
Laggards Future-built
BOSTON CONSULTING GROUPTHE WIDENING AI VALUE GAP 7EXHIBIT 3
70% of AI’s Value Is Concentrated in Core Businesses
Source: BCG Build for the Future 2025 Global Study (n = 1,250).
Note: Customer service is considered a core business function in some industries (e.g., banking, insurance, and real estate) but a support function in 
others (e.g., consumer products, automotive, and logistics).Distribution of AI value potential across functions in 2025 (%)
R&D and innovation
Digital marketing
Consumer journey
Pricing
Sales
Core customer service
Manufacturing
Maintenance
Digital supply chain
Total core
Customer support
IT
Procurement
HR
Finance
Legal
Total support13
9
5
5
6
70
4
2
30+8 pp
+6 pp
–8 pp2024’s sales and
marketing categoryCustomer-centric and
IT workﬂows account
for >50% of perceived
beneﬁts from AI+8 pp
2024’s operations
category
–7 pp
X Changes vs 2024
AI is already creating tangible value in multiple core 
business workflows. For example, AI-powered infrastructure 
monitoring and predictive maintenance helps energy 
companies reduce costly downtime, driving strong cost-
avoidance benefits. Some 45% of these firms have either 
scaled or fully deployed this workflow, leading to avoidance 
of 30% of addressable costs when fully deployed. 
(See Exhibit 4.)
GenAI helps these and other firms leverage predictive 
AI in the service of wider adoption by facilitating 
nontechnical communication and engagement. Future-
built companies, which put predictive AI on their CEO 
agendas as early as 2021, are now much faster than others 
at enabling broad adoption.On Come Agents
The emergence of agentic AI in the past 12 months 
represents a critical development in making AI more 
relevant to businesses. Agentic AI combines predictive AI 
and GenAI in core business workflows across the entire 
value chain. The workflows can be simple, such as performing 
reconciliation in the procurement function, but companies 
can also integrate multiple agents into more complex 
workflows, such as supply chain management or consolidated 
supply and demand workflows in call center rostering. 
The most successful examples involve embedding agents 
across entire workflows rather than running them as 
isolated pilots. In this sense, AI agents can be thought of as 
digital workers . They perform alongside or under the 
supervision of human workers to digest large volumes of 
data, perform logic and reasoning functions, make 
decisions, and act. Internal feedback loops enable them to 
learn and improve outcomes.
BOSTON CONSULTING GROUPTHE WIDENING AI VALUE GAP 8AI Maturity Varies by Sector and Region
AI maturity, which we define as the ability to create value at 
scale, varies by sector. Maturity has advanced across most 
industries—but not evenly. New front-runners have emerged, 
legacy sectors continue to struggle, and sharp contrasts are 
visible in both capability adoption and workforce readiness. 
And though maturity varies across sectors, companies in each 
one have made cutting-edge progress.
Software, telecommunications, and payments and fintech 
lead the maturity race in 2025, showing strong year-over-
year development and boosting their positions on our index 
by 13 points, 11 points, and 7 points, respectively. Fashion 
and luxury, chemicals, and real estate and construction 
remain at the lower end of the AI maturity curve.
In sectors such as airlines and telecommunications, AI’s 
contribution to value in core functions pushes 80% (up 15 
percentage points (pp) and 8 pp, respectively, from 2024). 
Chemicals, oil and gas, and machinery and automation 
show the highest shift toward AI use in core functions, with 
increases of 14 to 19 pp. 
There are big disparities in access to AI tools. In relatively 
immature sectors, less than 50% of employees have access 
to GenAI tools such as Copilot and ChatGPT. In relatively 
mature sectors, more than 70% of staff have access. We 
found disparities in training as well. Software companies 
plan to upskill 55% of their staff in the coming year while 
chemicals and machinery and automation firms plan to 
train less than 15%. Although access to tools and training 
is insufficient by itself to drive meaningful value, it is a 
strong indicator of whether a company or sector takes 
AI seriously.
Regional differences are subtle. North America tends to be 
slightly ahead on most adoption metrics. Asia-Pacific 
follows, with Europe somewhat farther behind, though all 
regions have a mix of future-built and lagging companies.
Asia-Pacific companies allocate the highest share of their IT 
budget to AI (5.2% versus 4.6% in Europe and 4.4% in North 
America), and these companies are reporting slightly higher 
value. Looking ahead to 2028, Asia-Pacific expects a revenue 
increase of 10% (versus 7% for Europe and 8% for North 
America) and cost reduction of 12% (versus 10% for others). 
Agentic AI adoption varies, too: 51% of firms in North 
America are experimenting with or deploying agents versus 
45% in Asia-Pacific and 41% in Europe. Interestingly, Asia-
Pacific allocates the largest share of AI budget to agentic 
development (32% versus 29% in North America and 22% 
in Europe).

BOSTON CONSULTING GROUPTHE WIDENING AI VALUE GAP 9
EXHIBIT 4
No Matter the Industry, Scaled Workflows in the Core Business Are 
Already Creating Value
Source: BCG Build for the Future 2025 Global Study (n = ~900 for workflows) .
1Estimate based on the predominant AI type in each workflow, even if there is always some of the other.
2Scaled or fully deployed stage of adoption for the workflow.Industry WorkﬂowMain
type of AI1 Adoption
(%)2 
20 20
50
23
29
25
16
18
33
41
30
29Average self-reported
impact (%) KPI
Revenue gainsDynamic pricing optimization
Real-time adjustments based on demandTravel, city, and
infrastructureTechnology,
media, and
telecommu-
nicationsProduct ideation, development,
and insights
Powered by analytics and trendsRevenue gains
Customer experience
improvementSelf-service portals and apps
AI-driven troubleshooting and
management
Cost savingsAI-powered infrastructure monitoring,
maintenance and failure preventionEnergy
Cost savingsAI-powered robotics in production
Advanced assembly and task automationIndustrial goodsCost savingsDemand forecasting and
inventory optimizationConsumerInsurance
Revenue gainsUnderwriting optimization
Automation for risk assessment
and policy approvalCost savingsClaims validation and
fraud detection
Real-time anomaly discernment
Predictive AI
Generative AICurrent
Expected when fully deployed
Companies should view agentic AI as the next step in AI 
implementation, not as the starting point. The prerequisites 
for agents include strong data foundations, scaled AI 
capabilities, and clear governance. The best way to deploy 
agents is through a few high-value workflows with clear 
implementation plans and workforce training, rather than in 
a massive rollout of agents everywhere at once.
For example, a global beauty products company 
implemented a step change in its sales and marketing as it 
sought to address multiple issues with customers’ online 
experience. These problem areas included highly 
fragmented sources of information, a lack of personalized 
guidance, and an inability to access important product 
information before making a purchase decision. The 
company’s solution was to introduce the industry’s first 
large-scale virtual beauty assistant, integrated into the 
company’s websites and e-commerce journeys extending 
across more than 20 markets and covering eight brands. The automated assistant combines AI-powered consultation 
with real-time personalization, supported by a unified data 
and cloud platform. The virtual assistant was deployed in 
less than 12 months, and the company expects to gain $100 
million in incremental revenue from the initiative—doubling 
the ROI of traditional e-commerce customer pathways, and 
enabling a new model of always-on, personalized 
customer engagement.
A leading electronic device manufacturer sought to 
integrate GenAI across infrastructure, manufacturing, and 
frontline operations. Its previous digital efforts were 
fragmented; it needed central orchestration, governance, 
and a technician-focused transformation. The answer lay in 
assembling and stocking a “company store” of centralized 
agentic AI solutions to govern, scale, and monitor AI use 
cases across the manufacturer’s more than 200 factories. 
Companies can use core agents repeatedly, accelerating 
deployment of new workflows and supporting 80% 
BOSTON CONSULTING GROUPTHE WIDENING AI VALUE GAP 10automation in complex operational workflows such as 
defects diagnostics and production planning. The company 
has modeled more than $300 million in EBIT impact 
through scalable GenAI workflows.
According to our survey, agents account for about 17% of 
total AI value in 2025, and they are moving fast. Agentic 
value is expected to almost double to 29% by 2028. (See 
Exhibit 5.) Agents are expanding the value gap between 
future-built firms and their slower rivals. Future-built 
companies already allocate 15% of their AI budgets to 
agents. A third of these companies use agents, compared 
with 12% of scalers and almost none of laggards. For all 
companies, agents represent both a massive opportunity 
and a pressing risk. Companies urgently need to redesign 
how work gets done, addressing the impact of agents on 
existing processes, roles, and skills.
Agents Do Not Work Alone
Companies are aware that they do not have the internal 
skills to build and deploy agents by themselves. The best 
companies respond by working with partners from a large 
and growing ecosystem of infrastructure, platform, and 
applications providers. Our survey shows that companies 
that leverage this ecosystem are three times as likely as 
those that don’t to experiment with or deploy agents and to 
reuse models and prompts across workflows. Future-built companies also determine what they should build internally 
versus what they should access from the ecosystem. They 
move toward a flexible tech architecture and data model 
that is interoperable across multiple vendors’ solutions. They 
entrench the critical capabilities in-house.
A leading insurance company partnered with best-in-class 
tech vendors—including AI infrastructure, foundation 
model, and data integration providers—to deploy agentic 
AI across its underwriting and claims functions, boosting 
the speed of underwriting processes and enabling 
enterprise-wide transformation through the orchestration 
of a multivendor ecosystem.
Powerful as they are, agents present new risks that must 
be managed, and it’s concerning that 72% of companies 
already report unmanaged AI-security risks. Any firm using 
AI must design and embed protections and guardrails at 
scale without slowing performance. Executives at future-
built companies look to remove roadblocks as they build in 
security, effectively solving issues such as fear of adverse 
customer experience, hallucinations, bias, and misuse of 
data—issues that often bog down laggards. 
Agents do not operate without humans. Their performance 
depends on strong human orchestration in redesigned 
roles. The best companies reconfigure workflows to 
combine autonomous agents with human oversight, 
maximizing value and adoption.
EXHIBIT 5
Value from Agentic AI Is Expected to Double by 2028
Source: BCG Build for the Future 2025 Global Study (n = 1.250).
Note: Because of rounding, not all bar segment totals equal 100%. 
1Reported split of AI-driven value that reaches the bottom line across predictive, generative, and agentic AI. 
2Reported on the basis of their perceived value and deployment priority for agentic AI at the respondent's company.2x more value is expected to come
from agentic AI by 2028 (%) 1Companies are experimenting
with agentic AI… Companies prioritize customer
experience use cases for agents
Top 5 functions prioritized for
agentic AI usage (%)2 Agentic
Generative
Predictive
3817
2028…Thanks to budget allocation46%Of companies are experimenting
with early pilots or deploying agents
(with 16% of these companies
already demonstrating
tangible value)
30%Of companies are spending over
15% of their AI budget on agents Customer
service
 Customer
journey
 R&D/
innovation
 Digital
marketing
 Manufacturing50
37
27
Customer experience
Innovation Operations
BOSTON CONSULTING GROUPTHE WIDENING AI VALUE GAP 11
Our research shows that regardless of sector or size of 
enterprise, future-built companies follow a well-defined and 
proven playbook, rooted in an AI-first operating model , to 
generate value and expand their advantage. (See Exhibit 
6.) We laid out the winning formula in our 2024 report, and 
the evidence this year suggests that companies should 
double down on it, since value creation clearly compounds 
for firms that focus on making the right moves.
The playbook has five strategies:
• Lead from the top with an aggressive multiyear strategic 
AI ambition.
• Reshape current workflows and invent new ones with 
value-based prioritization of AI implementation and 
rigorous tracking of results.
• Transform to an AI-first operating model rooted in 
human-machine collaboration.• Secure and enable the necessary talent by anticipating 
new needs, leveraging the supplier ecosystem, tenaciously 
upskilling people, and transforming workflows.
• Build a fit-for-purpose technology architecture and 
data foundation. 
Pursue a Multiyear Strategic 
AI Ambition 
Future-built companies approach AI as board- and CEO-
sponsored programs, thereby elevating the agenda above 
isolated experiments or pilots. Top management translates 
overall business goals into a multiyear, fully funded AI 
vision with an explicit execution roadmap. Nearly 100% of 
future-built organizations report deeply engaged C-suites, 
compared with only 8% of laggards. They prioritize AI 
opportunities through a clear, sequenced roadmap rather 
than switching on all enterprise applications at once.What Value Generators Do Differently
BOSTON CONSULTING GROUPTHE WIDENING AI VALUE GAP 12Future-built firms follow several organizing principles (see 
Exhibit 7) :
• Shared Ownership. One defining practice of these 
companies is a model of co-ownership between the 
business and IT. Each partner has clear decision rights 
and shared accountability. Future-built companies are 
1.5 times as likely as others to adopt this shared model, 
and more than 40% of them (versus 19% of stagnating 
firms) explicitly embed shared ownership of AI into their 
governance. This ensures that technology and business 
leaders align on ambitious targets and scale AI with 
measurable impact. Future-built companies also strike a 
balance between empowering decentralized innovation 
and having accountable P&L owners in the center 
provide steering.
• Top-Down Removal of Roadblocks. Future-built 
leaders tackle systemic challenges, such as filling 
talent gaps, implementing responsible AI, and breaking 
through technology and data bottlenecks, through top-
down intervention. Their dedication to institutionalizing 
accountability makes them three times as likely as 
others to appoint a chief AI officer and twice as likely to 
designate a chief data officer. These roles not only help 
remove structural barriers, but also help drive cross-
enterprise adoption.• Visible, Outspoken Executive Sponsorship. Senior 
executives in future-built organizations act as highly 
visible sponsors of AI. They articulate a unified AI vision, 
fund it as a strategic priority, and demonstrate that they 
are personally committed to embedding AI in strategic 
decision making. Nearly all C-level leaders actively use 
AI in their day-to-day activities, acting as role-models for 
adoption and pushing the scaling of initiatives across 
the enterprise. 
A major global bank has piloted an AI-first greenfield 
transformation of its HR function as a top-down strategic 
program to show how the technology can fundamentally 
reshape employee journeys. Instead of scattering 
responsibilities across central, divisional, and functional 
HR units, the bank reimagined HR from “hire to retire.”
The bank’s approach was not to optimize isolated 
processes, but to reinvent the HR function end-to-end with 
an AI-first lens. Three fundamental questions guided the 
redesign: Which employee customer journeys are relevant? 
Which parts can and should be covered by AI (including 
GenAI and agents)? Which tasks need to remain with the 
internal workforce?EXHIBIT 6
Future-Built Companies Pursue Five Strategies
Source: BCG Build for the Future 2025 Global Study (n = 1,250).
Note: FTE = full-time equivalent.What future-built companies do diﬀerently Outperformance versus laggards
More C-level executives and leadership teams deeply engaged with AI
More likely to have appointed a chief AI oﬃcer
More likely to have appointed a chief data oﬃcerPursue a multiyear
strategic ambition
More AI workﬂows already deployed or scaled
More governance in place or AI value-measuring setup
More focus on reshaping and inventing workﬂows toward AI Reshape and invent
with impact
More likely to leverage strategic workforce planning for AI
Higher maturity in implementing responsible AI guardrails and governance
More likely to ensure shared business-IT ownership on AI implementationImplement an AI-ﬁrst
operating model
More likely to dedicate time and structure programs for AI learning
More FTEs planned for AI upskilling in the coming year
More likely to involve employees in shaping and adopting AISecure and enable
necessary talent
More standard templates and enterprise-wide data models
More central AI data policies deﬁned and monitored by central team
More central AI platforms in operation to enable scale and adoption12x
3x
2x
5x
2.5x
2.5x
5x
5x
1.5x
4x
3x
2x
3x
3x
3xUse ﬁt-for-purpose
technology and data 
BOSTON CONSULTING GROUPTHE WIDENING AI VALUE GAP 13The bank redefined a set of employee journeys (such as “I 
apply and join,” “I get feedback,” “I get rewarded,” and “I 
leave”)—and all the component parts—to serve as the 
backbone of the transformation. It anchored the redesign in 
four principles: the desired employee experience, the new 
operating model, required functional capabilities, and 
enabling technologies. Guided by these principles, the bank 
built a capability roadmap, sequenced by importance and 
impact, and defined clear KPIs (such as time-to-hire, 90-day 
retention rate, and cycle time for service requests) to track 
progress. Rather than claiming broad automation or 
quantified savings, the bank launched targeted prototypes—
such as AI-enabled summarization of feedback to support 
line managers in the annual performance cycle—that 
demonstrated major efficiency gains and informed a high-
level business case for future savings.
Senior leadership is visibly steering the program, supported 
by a small group of domain experts, to ensure speed, 
accountability, and the achievement of its value ambition. 
This approach will greatly accelerate HR performance and 
efficiency, and the bank can apply the resulting insights 
about core process reinvention with AI to other functions.Reshape and Invent with Impact
Future-built and scaling companies go beyond automating 
processes and workflows with AI to create value by 
reshaping existing businesses and inventing new ones. 
They rethink how work gets done with different forms of 
the technology, such as vision AI, which enables computers 
to analyze visual data and derive useful information from 
images and videos. Nearly 90% of future-built and scaling 
companies expect most of their AI value to come from 
reshaping and inventing business processes.
Consider the case of a global leader in water, hygiene, and 
sustainability solutions, which used AI to build an entirely 
new digital restaurant technology business powered by 
GenAI and vision AI. Starting with pilots in the US, the 
company created vision AI models to observe operations in 
the back-of-house of a restaurant and generate AI-driven 
after-action reports that included clear, actionable guidelines 
for optimizing speed of service, labor efficiency, and kitchen 
operations. The company earned 100% customer 
satisfaction in trials. It identified an addressable market of 
$1 billion to $1.5 billion with target revenue of about $400 
million in five years at twice the gross margin of its 
traditional product set. It is now scaling up the new initiative, 
using a combination of organizational skills and advanced 
technology to create a new business and revenue stream.EXHIBIT 7
Future-Built Companies Get It Right with Joint Business-IT Ownership 
and C-Level Accountability
Source: BCG Build for the Future 2025 Global Study (n = 1,250).
Note: Because of rounding, not all bar segment totals equal 100%.
1“Who has primary ownership for driving the AI implementation in your company?” 
2“Have you created dedicated roles to drive AI delivery and transformation in your company? (Select all that apply).”Future-built companies ensure joint ownership between IT
and business teams for driving the AI implementation (%) 
Business only
Business
advised by IT
Equal
responsibility
IT advised
by business
IT only 20127 7
Stagnating Emerging Scaling Future-built27
29281933 4343231917
More likely to have joint
ownership by IT and
business teams 125103
1.5x
Exclusive IT ownership
is a key indicator of
stagnating companies0.5xFuture-built companies
institutionalize AI
accountability
More likely to have
appointed a chief AI oﬃcer3x
More likely to have
appointed a chief data oﬃcer2x
BOSTON CONSULTING GROUPTHE WIDENING AI VALUE GAP 14Successful companies also drive value by prioritizing their 
AI portfolios for financial or operational impact, which 
results in strong alignment of adoption and expected 
outcomes. Future-built and scaling companies achieve a 
76% higher match between where AI is deployed and 
where it delivers impact. Prioritization accelerates 
implementation. Some 62% of initiatives at future-built 
companies have already been deployed, compared with 
12% for laggards. Overall, these companies achieve faster 
time-to-impact—typically 9 to 12 months instead of 12 to 
18 months. (See Exhibit 8.) 
A consumer products company is boosting its global 
marketing function’s efficiency by using a data-driven 
prioritization process to streamline and simplify marketing 
campaign development. The marketing function employs 
multiple teams that work on different brands in more than 
50 markets. A project team used a department-wide survey 
to map all of the company’s campaigns, activities, and 
allocated resources. The map helped identify the most 
promising opportunities for optimization through AI and 
their estimated value potential. The resulting feasibility 
matrix highlighted the most value-promising workflows. 
Integrating AI into these workflows has enabled the company to improve the efficiency of its marketing, mostly 
through internal and external cost reductions, such as agency 
cost and process streamlining. It achieved savings of 25% 
to 40% in time spent on content creation, brand planning, 
and reporting, and it doubled its speed to market for 
campaign activation with better-quality deliverables. It is now 
following a proven playbook to scale AI in other functions, 
such as sales, supply chain management, and R&D. 
Leaders consistently track and report results. More than 
60% of future-built firms rigorously track AI value, 
compared with only 17% of stagnating companies. 
Adopt an AI-First Operating Model
Future-built companies understand the need to move fast, 
but they are equally attentive to evolving their operating 
model over time along multiple dimensions. An effective AI 
operating model does not focus on replacing people with 
technology; it entails reimagining the company around AI. 
Humans are no less critical to the process than before, but 
they have redesigned roles in workflows that are 
restructured to include digital workers.
EXHIBIT 8
Efficient Prioritization Enables Future-Built Companies to Deploy and 
Scale More Workflows Faster
Source: BCG Build for the Future 2025 Global Study (n = 1,250). Future-built companies have over 5x the AI workﬂows in deployment (%)…
Not adopted Planned Pilot Scaling Fully deployed
Laggards233431
1Future-built
20
62%
Deployed
12%
Deployed… and are up to 2x faster
Average number of months
required to fully deploy
Planning accuracy increases with
experience of full deployment9–12
Likely overly optimistic
without prioritization and
a clear roadmap12–18
BOSTON CONSULTING GROUPTHE WIDENING AI VALUE GAP 15As they move the organization toward an AI operating 
model, the C-suite needs to answer a new set of design 
questions, including the following:
• How can we deliver these outcomes differently by 
leveraging AI agents? What key workflows can we 
reshape with AI? (It’s important in this context to 
think in terms of reinvention rather than incremental 
improvement, as the global bank described earlier did.)
• Where will humans continue to provide distinctive value 
in reshaped workflows?
• How do human and digital workers coexist with 
appropriate accountability in hybrid structures? 
• How do we ensure that our responsible AI program has 
teeth and is followed? 
• Recognizing that AI deployments are rarely perfect, how 
do we build fast feedback loops?
• What’s the best balance between centralizing expertise 
in centers of excellence versus democratizing AI usage 
across the organization?
Although these questions are complex—and the answers 
are often even more so—future-built companies embrace 
the shift deliberately. They move from people-centered 
processes augmented by digital tools to AI-agent-centered 
processes orchestrated by people. They are five times as 
likely as laggards to engage in strategic workforce 
planning for AI. Two aspects of the new model are 
particularly important: governance and partnerships 
within the ecosystem.
As a senior retail executive told us, “It is important to get 
the operating model right as more AI solutions are 
deployed. We concentrate in particular on senior 
sponsorship and ownership of AI benefits by the 
businesses, which creates the room to invest in 
foundational data and on the right capabilities for the AI 
buildout. In our model, the AI capital allocation is managed 
centrally to make sure we are prioritizing the largest 
opportunities, but the amortization is carried by the 
business teams to ensure that they have skin in the game 
and own the impact.”
Governance. Future-built companies strike a balance 
between empowering decentralized innovation and 
maintaining central steering with accountable P&L owners 
in the center. These companies are 1.5 times as likely to 
have their IT and business functions share ownership of the 
transformation with clear decision rights, 4.6 times as 
likely to have fit-for-purpose guardrails, and 2.6 times as 
likely to have rigorous tracking of AI value across the 
organization. They set out clear AI-driven KPIs and a plan 
for top-down showcasing of AI-first progress. Partnerships Within the Ecosystem. Working with 
external experts is important in the AI operating model. 
Partnerships are often the best—and sometimes the only—
way to secure the requisite talent, gain greater flexibility and 
access to the latest technology, and enable speedier shifts in 
how the organization operates. These ventures can create 
new engines for value creation, and in some markets they 
may be the only way for companies to operate. 
Most companies need to think through how to remodel 
in-house and external resources to boost the successful use 
of large-scale partnerships. Indeed, the rapidly maturing 
supplier ecosystem— including maturing language models 
and more agentic AI offers by function and sector from 
hyperscalers, platform companies, and a plethora of AI-
native application providers—should give executives at 
non-future-built companies an incentive to explore what 
partnerships can do to accelerate their AI programs.
Secure and Enable the 
Necessary Talent 
Media reports tend to focus on projected job losses 
resulting from AI, and undoubtedly some jobs, especially 
ones involving more structured and repetitive tasks, will go 
away. Nevertheless, for an AI operating model to work, 
access to human talent is more critical than ever. Future-
built companies understand this. They recognize that 
scaling AI requires access to scarce talent, and they act 
decisively to attract, retain, and upskill individuals who can 
orchestrate and oversee AI agents in designing, deploying, 
and managing next-generation AI capabilities without 
delay. In the short term, this means hiring knowledgeable 
talent. In the medium to long term, though, it means 
building the infrastructure and systems required to assess 
shifting talent and skill needs, retrain and upskill current 
staff while reinventing workflows, manage a hybrid worker 
environment, and manage an overall evolution in people 
skills mix.
Upskilling and Engaging the Workforce. Future-built 
firms invest in broad-based employee enablement. They 
pair bold training ambitions with widespread engagement: 
more than 50% of employees at these companies are 
expected to be upskilled in AI in 2025, compared with only 
20% at laggards. Future-built firms are also four times as 
likely to carve out time for structured learning. As a result, 
50% more staff use AI in their daily work, shifting their 
contributions to higher-value activities such as strategic 
thinking, judgment, and human–AI collaboration.
Co-Design and Workflow Redesign. To accelerate 
adoption, future-built companies engage employees 
actively in co-designing AI solutions. Integrating agents 
into a workflow is not a matter of bolting them onto legacy 
processes—it requires reimagining the workflow end-to-
end, bringing human and digital workers into functional 
harmony, and enabling interoperability across cloud-based, 
BOSTON CONSULTING GROUPTHE WIDENING AI VALUE GAP 16on-premises, and external ecosystems of AI agents and 
tools. Future-built companies involve the workforce twice 
as often as others do in reshaping workflows as they build, 
test, and deploy agents. This inclusiveness ensures 
smoother adoption and builds ownership and trust. These 
firms recognize that as the AI operating model takes hold, 
the role of humans evolves dramatically. Companies must 
look after AI workers as well as human colleagues so that 
both deliver optimal outcomes together. With the spread of 
AI, and especially of agents, humans must play a lead role 
in reimagining future agents and workflows.
Hybrid Worker Environments and Skills Evolution. 
Operating in a hybrid worker environment—one in which 
humans and AI agents collaborate—calls for new 
management capabilities . AI reshapes roles by 
automating routine processes, narrowing performance 
gaps in structured tasks, and amplifying the edge of top 
performers in complex, judgment-driven work. Future-built 
firms anticipate these shifts by assessing AI-first skill sets, 
adapting current roles, and creating new ones as required. 
The workforce mix shifts away from repetitive processes 
toward creativity, innovation, and contextual market 
insight. Managers act as role models for adoption. Human 
roles increasingly emphasize oversight, decision making, 
and confirmation that human and digital workers are 
delivering outcomes together.
Use Fit-for-Purpose Technology 
and Data 
Future-built companies recognize that capturing value from 
AI requires more than just adding new tools; it demands 
rewiring the firm’s architecture and processes around the 
new technology. Two years on from the launch of ChatGPT, 
many firms face a growing "GenAI burden”—a portfolio of 
siloed proofs-of-concept that cannot scale, duplicated 
effort across the business, rising costs, and ever-more-
complex security needs. To avoid this, the best companies 
adopt a strategic, horizontal tech stack with a dedicated 
agent and AI platform layer to control costs and risk, scale 
intelligently, and prove value incrementally.
As the use of agents multiplies, fragmented architectures 
that force teams to rebuild models from scratch are no 
longer viable. Future-built firms sidestep this problem by 
embracing a flexible, portfolio approach to technology. 
Recognizing that there is no single end-state architecture, 
they curate a mix of solutions to serve specific needs. This 
strategy involves making deliberate choices across four 
broad options for sourcing agentic capabilities:
• Standalone Agentic Solutions. Turnkey applications 
for narrow tasks, such as coding or research assistants
• Embedded Agentic Solutions. Capabilities integrated 
directly within major enterprise platforms like CRM or 
ERP, leveraging native data and governance • Agent Builder Platforms. Low-code or self-serve 
platforms that empower teams to build custom agents 
by using modular components 
• Custom-Built Agent Solutions. Tailor-made agents 
developed from scratch for differentiating use cases 
that require bespoke logic, heavy orchestration, or strict 
performance controls
Most companies find that a hybrid approach is the most 
effective strategy for balancing market solutions with 
internal customization. Our research shows that only 11% 
of firms rely primarily on in-house development, and just 
4% depend on a single, end-to-end vendor for their full AI 
stack. However, buying solutions everywhere without 
prioritization risks fragmentation and poor adoption.
Clear principles guide the hybrid portfolio strategy. Smart 
companies focus on core enablers such as data readiness 
and internal skills—platform-agnostic investments that 
deliver sustained value. It is also essential to treat the 
ownership of models and prompts as a strategic lever and 
to make conscious choices about when to adopt, adapt, or 
assemble solutions to maintain control and differentiation.
A consistent platform strategy ties these technology 
choices together. Future-built firms are three times as likely 
to operate a central, integrated AI platform as the 
backbone for their AI deployment. This platform approach 
has a compounding effect: the company builds common 
capabilities for security, monitoring, and orchestration 
once and then reuses them, ensuring that each new use 
case strengthens the platform, accelerates the next, and 
moves toward enterprise-level scale. To support this effort, 
more than half of future-built companies maintain 
centralized repositories of reusable models and prompts, 
drastically reducing duplicative work.
Finally, leaders implement a strong data foundation that 
allows business units to harness shared platforms and 
external partners. More than 50% of future-built firms 
operate on a single enterprise-wide data model, compared 
with just about 4% of their stagnating peers. This gives 
teams rapid access to reliable data for building tailored 
solutions. The data foundation is centrally steered but 
permits ingestion of data from different domains, creating 
both efficiency and scalability.
Future-built firms reinforce their data foundation with 
strong governance. These companies are three times as 
likely to enforce enterprise-wide data policies through 
central oversight teams, ensuring quality, trust, and 
responsible use. Central steering, combined with shared 
business accountability, safeguards data integrity while 
giving business units the ownership necessary to keep data 
current and usable.
BOSTON CONSULTING GROUPTHE WIDENING AI VALUE GAP 17
Are you ready? 
CEOs and their boards must make deploying AI for value a 
top priority. Most will need to overcome organizational 
reluctance, complex IT, poor data integrity and access, and 
workforce concerns about job losses and AI weaknesses. 
But articulating a clear ambition with a strong focus on 
value, as well as moving beyond a cost-only approach to 
emphasize innovation and competitive advantage, will put 
them on the right path. Future-built companies have given 
them a proven playbook to follow.
Each company will follow its own path, depending on its 
current capabilities. To identify the appropriate starting 
point, companies should assess and benchmark their 
current capabilities and highlight gaps with competitors. 
Laggards can follow the future-built playbook described in 
the previous chapter to move up the maturity curve, 
starting with a firm and bold commitment from top 
management and a sustained effort to translate business 
objectives into an overarching vision and strategy. 
Companies that are already scaling AI initiatives should 
invest (and reinvest their gains) in forward-looking 
capabilities, such as agentic AI innovation. (See Exhibit 9.) 
Adherence to our 10-20-70 rule for technology 
transformations will help speed the journey: 70% of a 
business’s strategic focus should be on the people and 
processes, 20% on the tech, and 10% on algorithms. (See Exhibit 10.) Our research shows that most roadblocks 
involve people, organization, and processes. In 2024, 
companies struggled with aligning AI to the overall strategy 
and establishing a business case, but now the priority has 
shifted to more concrete implementation challenges such as 
adoption of AI tools and management of unstructured data.
Still, companies that try to jump straight into reshaping 
and invention without taking the preliminary step of 
building the necessary capabilities—such as an AI-first 
operating model, people skills, and relevant technology—
typically fail. 
Successful AI implementation requires active collaboration 
with the tech ecosystem to overcome adoption bottlenecks 
involving orchestration layers, system connectivity, and 
enterprise data strategies. For all companies, interoperability 
is critical. Without open standards, each agent is at risk of 
becoming a silo. Initiatives such as the Model Context 
Protocol promote reusability across workflows, reduce 
deployment costs, and help avoid vendor lock-in.
The most important point is that time is short. The 
technology is advancing fast, making catching up more 
difficult with each passing week. Future-built companies 
are pulling away, widening the value gap, and putting slow 
movers in a deeper value hole. The others need to 
move now.How to Accelerate AI Value Creation
BOSTON CONSULTING GROUPTHE WIDENING AI VALUE GAP 18
EXHIBIT 9
The Future-Built Playbook for Climbing the AI Maturity Curve 
EXHIBIT 10
Most AI Roadblocks Involve People, Organization, and ProcessesSource: BCG analysis.
Source: BCG Build for the Future 2025 Global Study (n = 1,250).Pursue a multiyear
strategic ambition
Reshape and invent
with impact
Implement an AI-ﬁrst
operating model 
Secure and enable
necessary talent•Set up an AI program with an ambitious top-down
value target
•Ensure leadership commitment to AI transformation
and practical usage•Focus on achieving the concrete path to value that
you deﬁned
•Advance in forward-looking capabilities such as
agentic AI Develop AI strategy, advance AI 
capabilities, and scale AI eﬀectively
Laggard Scaling Future-builtTake the forefront of AI innovation and
cutting-edge AI capabilities, generating 
substantial value
•Prioritize high-ROI workﬂows in a rigorously 
tracked roadmap
•Select one or two business domains for end-to-end
AI-ﬁrst redesign•Scale AI workﬂows to unlock P&L impact 
across functions
•Invent new end-to-end AI-ﬁrst workﬂows to shape 
the market
•Establish an AI delivery oﬃce as accelerator, 
tracking progress and value
•Set up joint business/IT teams for prioritized 
workﬂows with clear KPIs•Scale the AI ecosystem with long-term partnerships
so all participants have skin in the game
•Empower teams to own AI solutions with joint 
business/IT ownership
•Support practical application of AI tools in
day-to-day work
•Start an AI upskilling eﬀort with protected time•Ensure enterprise-wide access and adoption of AI tools
and workﬂows
•Double down on workforce transformation to prepare
for agentic AI
•Deﬁne guardrails and set up for a scalable,
 modular AI architecture
•Leverage AI workﬂows to implement and enhance
the AI architecture •Drive enterprise-wide deployment of AI 
platforms at scale
•Reﬁne data and architecture management to 
increase eﬀectivenessUse ﬁt-for-purpose
technology and dataMove up
to scalingMove up to
future-built
BCG's 10-20-70 model Key challenges named by respondents (%)
Lack of access to high-quality data
Potential hallucinations and lack of explainability in AI
Insuﬃcient model accuracy and reliability
AI-driven security risks 
Integrating AI with systems, tools, and APIs
Compliance and implementing responsible AI 
High AI scaling costs diﬃcult to control 
No expertise to manage unstructured data
People adapting to changes and using AI daily
Shortage of AI talent 
Silos limiting cross-functional collaboration on AI
Missing clear AI metrics and ROI measurement 
Diﬃculty aligning AI initiatives with ﬁrmwide strategy
Social resistance and labor concerns limiting scale 
Signiﬁcantly higher for laggards versus future-builtLack of leadership support or commitment for AI68
66
72
63
77
69
63
42Algorithms
Technology
People,
organization,
and processesData science
capabilities to develop
and implement
algorithms
Scalable and 
modernized stack
that supports 
business needs
Eﬀective processes
supported by 
talent and change
management practices20%
70%10%
BOSTON CONSULTING GROUPTHE WIDENING AI VALUE GAP 19AI Definitions
AI Maturity Categories
• Stagnating. Are taking minimal or no AI action, lack 
foundational capabilities, and are not generating value
• Emerging. Have developed foundational capabilities 
and started initial experimentation, but are struggling to 
scale and generate value
• Scaling. Have developed an AI strategy and advanced 
capabilities, and are scaling them effectively while 
starting to generate value
• Future-built. Are at the forefront of AI innovation, 
systematically building cutting-edge AI capabilities 
across functions and consistently generating 
substantial value 
AI Operating Model
An AI operating model is an enterprise-wide way of working 
in which AI is co-owned by business and IT, embedded in 
governance, and funded as a strategic program led by top 
management. It requires top-down leadership to provide 
speed, clarity, and certainty, avoiding fake AI traps that 
occur when middle management disperses effort across 
small pilots without generating real value.
AI Value Realization Pathways
• Deploying. Boosting efficiency with GenAI tools (for 
example, in code generation, invoice reconciliation, and 
meeting summaries)
• Reshaping. Transforming core business workflows (for 
example, marketing, supply chain, and customer service) 
for productivity, quality, and speed
• Inventing. Creating AI-native offerings that unlock 
new revenue models (for example, hyper-personalized 
experiences, AI-powered products, and data monetization) 
AI Technologies
• Predictive AI. The use of artificial intelligence to 
analyze historical and current data and make predictions 
about future events or trends
• Generative AI. The use of artificial intelligence 
to generate new, realistic content by learning and 
replicating patterns• Agentic AI. A model of artificial intelligence execution 
with autonomous agents that can observe, reason, 
plan, use tools, and act, coordinating across workflows, 
tools, and systems with minimal human input; these 
agents incorporate predictive as well as GenAI, and vary 
enormously in terms of workflow complexity
• Vision AI. A type of artificial intelligence that can 
analyze and interpret visual data sources, such as 
images or videos 
AI Ecosystems and Partnerships
AI ecosystems and partnerships are networks of external 
providers (hyperscalers, platform vendors, and specialized 
AI firms) that companies can engage to accelerate adoption 
and scale. Strategic users of ecosystems are significantly 
more likely to adopt GenAI and agentic AI, reuse models 
and prompts across workflows, and generate greater value.
Machine Learning
Machine learning (ML) is a branch of AI that uses 
algorithms and statistical models to identify patterns in 
data and automatically improve performance through 
real-world experience, without being explicitly programmed 
to take specific new data points into account. ML 
underpins predictive AI and is a foundational enabler for 
generative and agentic AI.
Workflow
Workflow is a structured sequence of tasks, activities, and 
decisions designed to deliver a business outcome within a 
function or across functions. In the context of AI, 
companies are increasingly reimagining workflows end-to-
end, with agents and automation taking over routine steps 
while humans provide orchestration, judgment, and 
oversight. Workflows are the core unit of value creation in 
AI transformations, as they determine how efficiently and 
effectively work gets done across the enterprise.
Survey Methodology
We designed our 2025 Build for the Future survey to focus 
on the AI capabilities necessary to support strategic 
objectives, deliver significant business value, and identify 
and capitalize on new market possibilities.
Accordingly, we built our comprehensive AI maturity score 
on 41 foundational capabilities, each measured along four 
clearly defined maturity stages: stagnating, emerging, 
scaling, and future-built. Appendix
BOSTON CONSULTING GROUPTHE WIDENING AI VALUE GAP 20Next, we sorted the weighted scores into four numerical 
ranges:
 • Stagnating: 0–25
 • Emerging: >25–50
 • Scaling: >50–75
 • Future-built: >75–100
Our survey asked 1,250 CxOs and senior executives who 
are AI decision makers across more than 25 sectors to 
estimate their companies’ AI maturity along all 41 
capabilities, including outcomes in customer experience 
and operations in response to sector-specific questions. We 
drew insights on AI maturity and value from self-reported 
data provided by the respondents. Results reflect the 
business area that the respondents know best—not always 
the full company. Unless explicitly stated as realized (for example, as completed by the end of 2024), reported 
numbers reflect expected future impact. Although we took 
all available precautions to achieve highest data quality, 
responses may be subject to perception bias.
Respondents came from 68 countries in Asia, Europe, and 
North America and from nine industries: consumer goods; 
energy; financial services; health care; industrial goods; 
insurance; public sector; technology, media, and 
telecommunications; and travel, cities, and infrastructure. 
(See the exhibit.)
Financial metrics (for example, TSR and EBIT) are sourced 
via CapitalIQ and Orbis. Overall company performance has 
multiple drivers beyond AI.
We applied multivariate statistical methods such as 
random forest, logistic regression, and structural equation 
modeling (partial least squares regression) to calculate 
regression weights.
1,250 Responses Covering All Regions and Industries, as Well as a 
Wide Range of Company Sizes and Executive Positions
Source: BCG Build for the Future 2025 Global Study (n = 1,250).
Note: B = billion. 
1Europe includes data points from Africa and South America.37%
North
AmericaRegions
Revenue (%)40%
Europe123%
Asia-Paciﬁc
< $1B42
$1B–
$9.9B23
$10B–
$24.9B12
$25B–
$49.9B13
>$50BC-level (e.g., CEO, CIO, CTO, CFO)266
42Executive position (e.g., vice president)
Function or division leader or equivalent 
Others
Technology, media, and
telecommunicationsTravel, cities, and infrastructurePublic sectorInsuranceIndustrial goodsHealth careFinancial servicesEnergyConsumer goods
171167171012713Proﬁle of respondents (%)
Industries (%) 
BOSTON CONSULTING GROUPTHE WIDENING AI VALUE GAP 21
About the Authors

Jessica Apotheker is a managing director and senior 
partner in the Paris office of Boston Consulting Group, and 
the global CMO for BCG and BCG X. You may contact her 
by email at apotheker.jessica@bcg.com .

Nicolas de Bellefonds is a managing director and senior 
partner in BCG’s Paris office. You may contact him by 
email at debellefonds.nicolas@bcg.com .

Marc Roman Franke is a partner and associate director, AI 
and digital transformation, in BCG’s Berlin office. You may 
contact him by email at franke.marcroman@bcg.com .

Nina Kataeva is a managing director and partner in 
BCG’s Zurich office. You may contact her by email 
at kataeva.nina@bcg.com .

Vinciane Beauchene is a managing director and partner 
in the firm’s Paris office. You may contact her by email 
at beauchene.vinciane@bcg.com . 

Patrick Forth is a senior advisor and senior partner 
emeritus in the firm’s Sydney office. You may contact him 
by email at forth.patrick@advisor.bcg.com .

Michael Grebe is a managing director and senior partner 
in the firm’s Munich office. You may contact him by email 
at grebe.michael@bcg.com .

Santeri Kirvelä is a managing director and senior partner 
in the firm’s Helsinki office. You may contact him by email 
at kirvela.santeri@bcg.com .
BOSTON CONSULTING GROUPTHE WIDENING AI VALUE GAP 22

Djon Kleine is a managing director and partner in 
BCG’s Los Angeles office. You may contact him by email 
at kleine.djon@bcg.com .

Vladimir Lukic is a managing director and senior partner 
in BCG’s Boston office and is the global leader of the firm's 
Tech and Digital Advantage practice. You may contact him 
by email at lukic.vladimir@bcg.com .

Mary Martin is a managing director and senior partner 
in BCG’s Denver office. You may contact her by email 
at martin.mary@bcg.com .

Christoph Schweizer is CEO of Boston Consulting Group. 
For Further Contact
If you would like to discuss this report, please contact 
the authors.

Romain de Laubier is a managing director and senior 
partner in the firm’s Singapore office. You may contact him 
by email at delaubier.romain@bcg.com .

Amanda Luther is a managing director and senior 
partner in the firm’s Austin office. You may contact her by 
email at luther.amanda@bcg.com . 

Jeff Walters is a managing director and senior partner in 
the firm’s Hong Kong office. You may contact him by email 
at walters.jeff@bcg.com .
Acknowledgments
The authors extend their gratitude to everyone who 
contributed to the research and development of this report, 
including Charles Adamo, Florence Adida, Julie Bedard, 
Giuseppe Colombo, Maunoir de Kerros, Cyprien d’Harcourt, 
Anna Dorkel, Camille Duranton, Eva Engelhardt, Caroline 
Girard, Rim Hachani, Matthew Kropp, Nikolaus Lang, 
Michael Leyh, Deborah Lovich, Clemens Nopp, Lucas 
Quarta, Clémentine Remy, Lee Robertson, and Jürgen Rogg.
Boston Consulting Group partners with leaders in business 
and society to tackle their most important challenges and 
capture their greatest opportunities. BCG was the pioneer 
in business strategy when it was founded in 1963. Today, 
we work closely with clients to embrace a transformational 
approach aimed at benefiting all stakeholders—empowering 
organizations to grow, build sustainable competitive 
advantage, and drive positive societal impact.
Our diverse, global teams bring deep industry and functional 
expertise and a range of perspectives that question the 
status quo and spark change. BCG delivers solutions 
through leading-edge management consulting, technology 
and design, and corporate and digital ventures. We work 
in a uniquely collaborative model across the firm and 
throughout all levels of the client organization, fueled by 
the goal of helping our clients thrive and enabling them to 
make the world a better place.For information or permission to reprint, please contact 
BCG at permissions@bcg.com. To find the latest BCG 
content and register to receive e-alerts on this topic or 
others, please visit bcg.com. Follow Boston Consulting 
Group on LinkedIn , Facebook , and X (formerly Twitter) .
© Boston Consulting Group 2025. All rights reserved. 9/25