TECH REPORT: wef_emerging_technologies_2025
SOURCE: wef_emerging_technologies_2025.pdf
============================================================

## KEY SECTIONS ##

### EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ###
99. International Energy Agency (IEA). (2021). Executive summary. In Ammonia Technology Roadmap. 

--------------------------------------------------

### INTRODUCTION ###
drives appropriately in the context of its own 
sensors, and that also knows (thanks to connected 
sensors on a traffic light hundreds of yards away) 

--------------------------------------------------

### TECHNOLOGY CATALOG ###
Fax: +41 (0) 22 786 2744
contact@weforum.org
www.weforum.orgThe World Economic Forum, 
committed to improving 
the state of the world, is the 
International Organization for 
Public-Private Cooperation.

The Forum engages the 
foremost political, business 
and other leaders of society 
to shape global, regional 
and industry agendas.

--------------------------------------------------

### STRATEGIC OUTLOOK ###
provide a forward-looking perspective that bridges 
scientific potential with practical implementation. 
The most profound innovations are rarely obvious 
at first glance. They emerge through persistent 
observation, interdisciplinary collaboration and a 
fundamental willingness to reimagine what’s possible.

--------------------------------------------------

### CONCLUSIONS ###
https://www.iea.org/reports/ammonia-technology-roadmap/executive-summary. 
100. Hussain, J., Mubarak, M., Boopathi, D., & Jayabal, R. (2025). A comprehensive review of production and utilisation of 
ammonia as potential fuel for compression ignition engines. Next Sustainability, 5, 100116. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nxsust.2025.100116. 
101. Adeniyi, A., Bello, I., Mukaila, T., Sarker, N., & Hammed, A. (2023). Trends in biological ammonia production. 
Trends in Biological Ammonia Production, 12(2), 41. https://doi.org/10.20944/preprints202304.0543.v1. 
102. Ibid.
103. Spry, M., Westhead, O., Tort, R., Moss, B., et al. (2023). Water increases the faradaic selectivity of Li-mediated nitrogen 
reduction. ACS Energy Letters, 8(2), pp. 1230-1235. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsenergylett.2c02792. 
104. Fu, X. (2023). Lithium-mediated nitrogen reduction for electrochemical ammonia synthesis: From batch to flow reactor. 
Materials Today Catalysis, 3, 100031. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtcata.2023.100031. 
105. Zhou, Y., Fu, X., Chorkendorff, I., & Nørskov, J. K. (2024). Electrochemical Ammonia Synthesis: The energy efficiency 
challenge. ACS Energy Letters, 10(1), pp. 128-132. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsenergylett.4c02954. 
106. International Energy Agency (IEA). (n.d.). Critical Minerals. https://www.iea.org/topics/critical-minerals. 
107. Masia, B., Yang, M., & Cozzani, V. (2024). Risk assessment of ammonia fueled ships: Consequences on human 
health of ammonia releases from damaged fuel storage tanks. ACS Chemical Health & Safety, 31(6), pp. 503-520. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chas.4c00044. 
108. Wyer, K. E., Kelleghan, D. B., Blanes-Vidal, V., Schauberger, G., & Curran, T. P . (2022). Ammonia emissions from 
agriculture and their contribution to fine particulate matter: A review of implications for human health. Journal of 
Environmental Management, 323, 116285. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2022.116285. 
109. International Energy Agency (IEA). (n.d.) Ammonia Technology Roadmap: Towards more sustainable nitrogen 
fertilizer production. https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/6ee41bb9-8e81-4b64-8701-2acc064ff6e4/

--------------------------------------------------

### FORESIGHT FRAMEWORK ###
https://www.dubaifuture.ae/navigating-10-megatrends-shaping-our-future-in-2024.

--------------------------------------------------

### REFERENCES ###
https://www.nifa.usda.gov/about-nifa/impacts/using-drones-agriculture-natural-resources. 
134. Federal Communications Commission. (2024, 21 November). FCC ADOPTS ‘C-V2X’ AUTO SAFETY SPECTRUM 
RULES. https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/DOC-407683A1.pdf. 
135. Armeni, I., He, Z.-Y., Zamir, A., Gwak, J., (2019). 3D scene graph: A structure for unified semantics, 3D space, and 
camera. IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV). https://doi.org/10.1109/iccv.2019.00576. 
136. Cadena, C. et al. (2016). Past, Present, and Future of Simultaneous Localization and Mapping: Toward the Robust-Perception 
Age. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1309-1332. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7747236. 
137. Feng, D., et al. (2021). Deep Multi-Modal Object Detection and Semantic Segmentation for Autonomous Driving: 
Datasets, Methods, and Challenges. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 22, no. 3, 
pp. 1341-1360. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9000872. 
138. Rajvanshi, A., et al. (2023). SayNav: Grounding Large Language Models for Dynamic Planning to Navigation 
in New Environments. Cornell University. https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.04077. 

--------------------------------------------------

### ECOSYSTEM READINESS ###
KEY ACTIONS TO ACHIEVE SCALE
TechnologicalSocial
EconomicEnvironmentalPolicy
 Image: 

--------------------------------------------------

## FULL REPORT CONTENT ##

In collaboration 
with Frontiers
FLAGSHIP REPORT
JUNE 2025Top 10 Emerging 
Technologies of 2025
Contents
Images: Midjourney, Studio Miko. All images in this 
report were generated using artificial intelligence.
© 2025 World Economic Forum. All rights 
reserved. No part of this publication may 
be reproduced or transmitted in any form 
or by any means, including photocopying 
and recording, or by any information 
storage and retrieval system.Disclaimer 
This document is published by the 
World Economic Forum as a contribution 
to a project, insight area or interaction. 
The findings, interpretations and 
conclusions expressed herein are a result 
of a collaborative process facilitated and 
endorsed by the World Economic Forum 
but whose results do not necessarily 
represent the views of the World Economic 
Forum, nor the entirety of its Members, 
Partners or other stakeholders.Foreword 03
Building strategic foresight 04
Introduction 05
Methodology 06
1 Structural battery composites 09
2 Osmotic power systems 12
3 Advanced nuclear technologies 15
4 Engineered living therapeutics 18
5 GLP-1s for neurodegenerative disease 21
6 Autonomous biochemical sensing 24
7 Green nitrogen fixation 27
8 Nanozymes 30
9 Collaborative sensing 33
10 Generative watermarking 36
From weak signals to societal transformation 39
Contributors 40
Endnotes 43
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Foreword
Every year, remarkable innovations emerge 
from research labs around the world. Many hold 
tremendous promise, yet too few successfully 
make the critical leap from scientific discovery to 
real-world application. For 13 years, the World 
Economic Forum’s Top 10 Emerging Technologies 
report has aimed to change that by shining a 
spotlight on breakthrough technologies with the 
potential not only to cross this threshold but also 
to help societies adapt and thrive in the face of 
complex challenges.
This report serves a clear purpose: to catalyse 
forward-looking dialogues and shape technology 
agendas by connecting cutting-edge research 
with those who can help advance it. By identifying 
technologies at their turning point – where scientific 
achievement meets practical potential – we provide 
leaders in government, business and science with 
the insights needed to make forward-thinking 
decisions in a rapidly evolving landscape.
Our work arrives at a pivotal moment. The 
global innovation landscape continues to evolve, 
with shifting trade relationships, supply chain 
reconfigurations and regional dynamics creating 
new strategic considerations. In this context, 
the technologies highlighted in this report take 
on additional dimensions of importance. Some 
may offer pathways to greater self-sufficiency 
and resilience; others could serve as bridges for 
essential international collaboration despite broader 
tensions. Many represent areas where shared global 
interests matter more than short-term differences.
Each technology in this report has been carefully 
evaluated based on its novelty, development 
progress and transformative potential. From 
materials that store energy within their structure to 
new treatments for neurodegenerative diseases, 
these innovations have moved beyond theory and 
demonstrated the capacity to strengthen society’s 
ability to adapt and thrive.What makes this report valuable is that we look 
beyond what these technologies are to envision 
what they could create. Each entry includes a 
strategic outlook that illustrates possible futures 
if these innovations reach their full potential. 
Developed in collaboration with the Dubai Future 
Foundation, these forward-looking scenarios 
help readers see transformative possibilities 
and inspire the commitment needed to move 
these technologies from promising concepts to 
widespread implementation.
The technologies in this edition reveal exciting 
patterns: combining energy systems with advanced 
materials, using biological approaches to improve 
human health, reimagining industrial processes 
for sustainability and creating new foundations for 
trust in connected systems. Each represents not 
just a technical advance, but a path towards more 
resilient and sustainable societies.
This work would not be possible without Mariette 
DiChristina and Bernard Meyerson, co-chairs of 
our Emerging Technologies Steering Committee. 
Their leadership has been essential in shaping both 
this report and the selection process behind it. 
We are equally grateful to our steering committee 
members, whose diverse expertise ensures we 
identify truly groundbreaking technologies with the 
potential to transform our world.
As the report continues to evolve, this year we’ve 
also introduced ecosystem readiness maps that 
provide practical guidance on the specific actions 
needed to scale these technologies from promise 
to impact.
We offer this report not as an endpoint, but as a call 
to action – a catalyst for the collaboration essential 
to help these technologies fulfil their promise. In an 
era of unprecedented challenges and uncertainty, 
these innovations give us powerful tools to adapt, 
overcome and thrive. Frederick Fenter 
Chief Executive Editor, 
FrontiersJeremy Jurgens 
Managing Director, 
World Economic Forum
Top 10 Emerging 
Technologies of 2025
June 2025
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Building strategic 
foresight
Strategic foresight is the deliberate exploration 
of possible futures to inform today’s decisions. 
In an era of accelerating change, foresight enables 
leaders to move beyond short-term thinking, 
anticipate disruption and uncover opportunities 
that lie beyond the immediate horizon.
At its core, strategic foresight recognizes that 
technological innovation cannot be understood 
through a single, linear perspective. At the Dubai 
Future Foundation (DFF), we assess emerging 
technologies through three simultaneous and 
interconnected lenses: Beyond merely predicting outcomes, strategic 
foresight unpacks the various pathways through 
which different possibilities might unfold, revealing 
how innovations can transform our collective future.
In exploring these technologies, we invite 
readers to look beyond technical specifications. 
Each innovation represents more than an 
isolated advancement – it is a signal of broader 
transformations taking shape across our global 
systems. These are not just technologies, but 
potential catalysts for reimagining how we address 
complex global challenges.
For those interested in a deeper exploration of 
each technology’s potential, the strategic outlook 
sections that follow each description offer a 
comprehensive view of transformative possibilities 
and strategic implications. To ground these 
technologies in the context of global change, every 
entry is tagged with two of the DFF megatrends that 
are most likely to enable, and be enabled by, the 
respective technology within the next decade.
By connecting these emerging technologies to 
wider contextual frameworks, we aim to provide a 
comprehensive view that bridges technical potential 
with human aspiration. Our goal is not to present 
a definitive roadmap, but to spark imagination, 
encourage dialogue and consider multiple futures 
that might emerge from some of today’s most 
promising innovations.H.E. Khalfan Belhoul 
Chief Executive Officer, 
Dubai Future Foundation
As an assumption
Technological progress will continue 
to accelerate.
As an uncertainty
Technologies are shaped by complex constraints 
– infrastructure limitations, energy demands, 
policy shifts and societal readiness.
As an enabler
Technologies that underpin emerging megatrends 
and future opportunities.
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Introduction
A message from the Top 10 Emerging 
Technologies Steering Group Co-Chairs.
Mariette DiChristina 
Dean and Professor, 
Practice in Journalism, 
Boston University College 
of CommunicationBernard S. Meyerson 
Chief Innovation Officer 
Emeritus, IBM
The Fourth Industrial Revolution continues apace, 
filling this year’s Top 10 Emerging Technologies 
report with a striking array of integrative advances 
that address global gaps and concerns. Our 
selection reflects the diverse nature of technological 
emergence – some technologies, like structural 
battery composites, represent novel approaches 
to longstanding challenges, while others, such as 
GLP-1s (glucagon-like peptide-1) for neurodegenerative 
diseases and advanced nuclear technologies, 
demonstrate how established innovations can find 
transformative new applications. Each represents a 
critical inflection point where scientific achievement 
meets practical potential for addressing global 
needs. (For more on how the Fourth Industrial 
Revolution sparks “waves of further breakthroughs”, 
see the final chapter of this report, “From weak 
signals to societal transformation”.)
Take, for instance, the integration of energy 
systems and materials, which provides dramatic 
improvements in functionality and efficiency as seen 
in this year’s list. In structural battery composites, 
transport gets an upgrade with “massless” energy 
systems that blend into the load-bearing elements. 
Turning to other sources of energy, advances in 
materials for semipermeable membranes enable 
“salt power” in osmotic power systems. Finally, in 
the search for non-carbon energy sources, new 
designs for next-generation nuclear power plants 
are coming online.
Biotechnology also offers some striking additions 
to human health in this year’s top 10. Biologically 
based interventions are gaining momentum as both 
treatment and monitoring solutions, moving beyond 
traditional pharmaceutical approaches. Witness 
engineered living therapeutics, microbes genetically 
engineered into living factories that could produce medicines and other therapeutic substances as 
needed by the body. A new class of drugs, called 
GLP-1s, well-known in weight-loss medications 
and management of type 2 diabetes, are now being 
brought to bear on brain-related diseases such as 
Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s. It is anticipated that 
autonomous biochemical sensing, where analytical 
devices continuously monitor chemical or disease 
markers, will soon replace single-use tests at scale.
Core industrial processes are being fundamentally 
reimagined for sustainability and efficiency. Examples 
in this year’s top 10 include green nitrogen fixation, 
in which atmospheric nitrogen is converted into 
crop-feeding ammonia for fertilizer with a vastly 
lowered carbon footprint. Meanwhile, nanozymes, 
laboratory-produced nanomaterials with enzyme-
like properties that act as catalysts in important 
industrial processes, offer increased stability, lower 
production costs and simpler synthesis processes.
Trust and safety in connected systems are clearly 
essential to our networked future. Collaborative 
sensing, for example, will rely on that. Sensors 
distributed in homes, vehicles and workspaces are 
increasingly being connected to each other and 
used by artificial intelligence (AI)-infused systems. 
Last and not least, this year, the World Economic 
Forum’s Global Risks Report 2025 again highlighted 
misinformation and disinformation as key current 
risks. Generative AI watermarking, which embeds 
invisible markers to verify authenticity and origins, 
may help offer a way forward.
Applied collaboratively and wisely, as always, 
emergent innovations inspire more confidence in 
humanity’s ability to improve the state of the world. 
We invite you to engage with this year’s list in detail 
and welcome your feedback.
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Methodology
The 2025 emerging technologies were 
selected through expert nominations, 
AI analysis, readiness assessment and 
strategic evaluation. 
Technologies were nominated for the Top 10 
Emerging Technologies of 2025 report through a 
survey distributed to the World Economic Forum’s 
Global Future Councils Network, the Frontiers 
network of chief editors, comprised of editors from 
top institutions worldwide, and the Top 10 Emerging 
Technologies Steering Committee members.
The report’s definition of “emerging technologies” 
encompasses both entirely novel innovations 
and established technologies being applied in 
transformative new ways. This inclusive approach 
recognizes that technological emergence occurs 
through multiple pathways – whether through 
groundbreaking new discoveries or through applying 
existing technologies to solve different problems in 
ways that could create significant new impact.
Survey respondents, representing a global 
community of trusted academics and researchers, 
provided information about the technology 
nominated, including the technology name, 
description, key breakthroughs, case studies and 
how it will impact economies, the environment and 
society, as well as potential risks that accompany 
the technology.
In 2025, more than 250 valid technology 
nominations were submitted by experts across 
industry and academia. To screen these 
submissions, the AI Trend Analyzer – developed 
by Frontiers – mapped nominations to key 
concepts and matched these concepts to their 
frequency in academic articles over a rolling 
10-year period. From this analysis, an average “trendiness” score was established, indicating each 
technology’s growing presence and momentum 
in research literature.
Each technology was also evaluated using the 
World Economic Forum Resilience Consortium’s 
Resilience for Sustainable, Inclusive Growth (2022)
framework, focusing on their potential to address 
systemic challenges and contribute to building 
adaptive capacity for future generations.
The ranked technologies were then filtered by 
removing those featured in previous editions of the 
report. Business funding data was added to support 
the analysis for each of the top 20 technologies, 
providing insight into market confidence and 
commercialization potential.
This refined shortlist of 20 technologies was then 
assessed by a steering committee of experts, who 
applied the following selection criteria:
 –Novelty: Early adoption is emerging, but 
widespread use is not yet achieved.
 –Impact: Potential for significant societal 
and economic benefit.
 –Depth: Developed across multiple entities, 
with broad and sustained interest.
This rigorous, multi-phase selection process 
ensures a comprehensive and objective 
assessment of each technology’s readiness 
and transformative potential. 
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Ecosystem readiness 
This year introduces an ecosystem readiness 
map for each technology. This analysis evaluates 
how prepared the societal infrastructure is for 
these technologies to scale and achieve their 
projected impact.For each technology, insights were gathered 
from the Top 10 Emerging Technologies Steering 
Committee, Frontier’s network of chief editors 
and futurists from the Dubai Future Foundation. 
These experts evaluated readiness across five key 
dimensions, commonly known as STEEP (social, 
technological, environmental, economic and 
political) analysis: 
Each dimension was rated on a four-point scale 
from “no readiness” to “high readiness”. The results 
are displayed in radar charts (see Figure 1) in each 
technology section, accompanied by key actions 
required to achieve scale. These assessments help identify critical gaps that 
must be addressed before technologies can reach 
their full potential, providing valuable context for 
decision-makers across sectors.
Ecosystem readiness map FIGURE 1
0.511.522.533.54Social
Technological Policy
Economic EnvironmentalBoxed Icons
 Social: Public awareness, acceptance, education levels and cultural values 
that support the technology
Boxed Icons
 Technological: Maturity of underlying technologies, research needs and supply 
chain readiness
Boxed Icons
 Environmental: Access to required resources, sustainability of materials and alignment 
with emission regulations
Boxed Icons
 Economic: Market demand, investment trends and business model viability
 Policy: Regulatory frameworks, international policy alignment and trade barriers
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Strategic outlooks
The strategic outlooks in this report were developed 
by the Dubai Future Foundation (DFF). For each 
selected technology, inputs included academic 
research literature, market analyses and an in-depth 
foresight analysis of key drivers and implications. The 
development process involved an initial assessment 
of each technology’s transformative potential, 
followed by a systematic analysis of cross-sector 
applications and implementation barriers. Parameters 
for evaluation included potential impact across 
economic, social and environmental dimensions, 
with particular attention to scaling requirements, 
governance implications and system-level changes. 
Each technology was also categorized according 
to its relationship with two of DFF’s megatrends 
framework categories to position these innovations 
within broader evolutionary patterns. This methodical 
approach ensures consistent evaluation across 
diverse technological domains. Explore the maps hereTransformation maps
To complement this year’s report, transformation 
maps have been developed in partnership with 
Frontiers’ chief editors. These digital tools visualize 
how each technology connects to broader systems 
and global priorities. Hosted on the Forum’s 
Strategic Intelligence Platform, the maps illustrate 
intersection points between emerging technologies 
and related topics, providing curated content from 
trusted sources. They offer decision-makers a 
practical resource for exploring potential impacts, 
understanding cross-domain relationships and 
tracking ongoing developments. 
Example: Green nitrogen fixation transformation map FIGURE 2
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Structural battery composites
Merging energy and engineering 
in motion.01
Structural battery composites (SBCs) integrate 
load-bearing mechanical components and 
rechargeable energy storage. This means structural 
battery composites can store energy the same 
way as traditional lithium-ion batteries, while 
also being rigid components of the vehicle or 
building that the battery is powering.1 In contrast, 
the electrochemical components of a traditional 
battery system are housed in a container that 
adds weight without providing any structural 
benefit. SBCs may include carbon fibre, epoxy 
resin or other lightweight, high-strength materials 
and can be 3D printed and optimized for 
surface area and structural strength to enhance 
efficiency.2 SBCs have uses in a wide variety of 
applications, ranging from electric vehicles (EVs) 
to aerospace technologies.
The concept of structural battery composites 
arose in the past couple of decades from 
advances in material science, particularly in 
the fields of composite materials, batteries and 
electrochemistry.3 The technology is still in the 
early stages of commercialization but has made 
significant progress. EVs already use batteries as 
part of the vehicle’s structure, but SBCs will take 
that to the next level by enabling body panels of all 
shapes and sizes to perform both functions. 
In the future, SBCs could enable all rigid vehicle 
body panels to similarly store energy. For example, 
Airbus is experimenting with SBCs for use in 
aircraft,4 whereas academic research continues to 
explore new materials and methods to enhance 
performance. Applications currently being explored 
include energy-storing vehicle body panels 
and drone frames, with some potential future 
applications including aircraft fuselages.
As transformative as its potential is, SBC 
technology has yet to achieve widespread adoption 
due to technical challenges such as achieving high 
energy storage density, long-term stability, safety, 
durability and cost-effectiveness.5 Regulatory 
hurdles also remain. As structural battery composite 
materials mature, a new set of safety regulations 
and standards must be developed before wide-
scale adoption is possible. Key milestones include 
the integration of lightweight materials like carbon 
fibre with battery technology, creating multilayer composites that can function as both structural 
components and energy storage units.
The impact of SBCs will be substantial. 
Economically, they promise to cut manufacturing 
costs by reducing the amount of structural materials, 
which, in turn, can lower the overall weight of 
vehicles and aircraft; lighter-weight vehicles require 
less fuel to operate as well. Environmentally, SBCs 
could lead to energy-efficient designs that reduce 
material requirements, and make reuse, repurposing 
and recycling faster and cheaper, if developed 
appropriately. Their use in industries including 
aviation and transport could contribute to more 
reliable and sustainable operations.Doug Arent 
Executive Director, National Renewable 
Energy Laboratory Foundation
Andrew Maynard
Professor, School for the Future of Innovation 
in Society, Arizona State University
David Parekh
Chief Executive Officer, SRI International
Figure Icons
Develop industry-specific demonstration 
platforms – Collaborate with key transport 
manufacturers (automotive, aerospace, 
marine) to build functional prototypes that quantify 
weight reduction, range improvement and structural 
integrity benefits.Ecosystem readiness map
Figure Icons
Establish specialized manufacturing 
capacity – Invest in pilot production 
facilities that combine battery 
manufacturing expertise with advanced 
composite fabrication techniques to address 
the unique production challenges of structural 
battery components.KEY ACTIONS TO ACHIEVE SCALE
TechnologicalSocial
Policy
Economic
Environmental Image: 
SBCs combine energy 
storage and structural 
strength, enabling 
lighter, multifunctional 
components for transport 
and aerospace.
Credit: Midjourney 
and Studio Miko. 
Prompt (abbreviated): 
“Golden layered quantum 
disks refining and filtering 
organic data into a single 
light stream.”
Read more: 
For more expert 
analysis, visit the SBCs 
transformation map. 
Authored by: Lief Erik Asp, 
Björn Johansson and 
Johanna Xu.
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Strategic outlook 
Structural battery composites
By Dubai Future Foundation
The convergence of materials science and energy technology 
through structural battery composites represents a 
critical inflection point for global industries. Over the next 
decade, these innovative materials have the potential 
to fundamentally restructure how infrastructure, energy 
storage and product design are conceived across 
multiple sectors.
With 85% of lithium currently refined by just three countries,6 
the geopolitical landscape of critical minerals currently 
stands at a pivotal moment. SBCs offer a strategic pathway 
to diversify and decentralize energy material supply chains. 
This technological shift could reshape global economic 
dependencies, transforming how nations approach energy 
infrastructure and technological sovereignty.
Beyond supply chain impacts, transformative potential is 
most evident in transport. In the automotive sector, a 10% 
reduction in vehicle weight can improve fuel efficiency by 
6-8% and increase EV range by 70%.7,8 Aviation presents 
an equally compelling opportunity, with potential fuel 
efficiency improvements of 15% over a 1,500 km flight.9 
These are not merely incremental improvements, but 
potential catalysts for systemic change in transport design 
and energy consumption.
To realize benefits at scale, strategic leaders must recognize 
challenges that extend beyond technological innovation. 
Existing regulatory frameworks do not fully account for 
dual-function materials. Safety standards, testing protocols 
and building codes will require comprehensive reimagining 
to accommodate materials that simultaneously provide 
structural integrity and energy storage.
Sustainability is both a critical challenge and an opportunity. 
Carbon fibre, while five times stronger than steel, currently 
faces significant environmental constraints due to carbon-intensive production and recycling challenges.10,11 
However, advances in AI-driven composite material 
design suggest the emergence of more scalable, 
bio-based alternatives.12
The most forward-thinking organizations will view 
this technology as more than a product improvement. 
It represents a fundamental redesign of how material 
functionality is conceived. In construction, this means 
buildings that are not just shelters, but active energy 
systems. In electronics, it translates to devices 
that seamlessly integrate structural integrity and 
power storage.
Strategic decision-makers face a critical choice. 
Those who proactively invest in understanding and 
developing these technologies will be positioned to:
Redesign entire product categories
Reduce energy consumption across industrial sectors
 Create more resilient and adaptive 
infrastructural systems
 Develop new economic models that challenge 
existing technological paradigms
The next decade will offer significant advantages to 
organizations that look beyond incremental improvements 
and recognize SBCs as a transformative technological 
platform. Success will depend on unprecedented 
collaboration across materials science, design, energy 
systems and regulatory frameworks.
 Related DFF megatrends: Materials and Energy Boundaries13
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Osmotic power systems
Channelling salt into energy.02
Osmotic power systems use a variety of means 
to generate energy from salinity (salt content) 
differences in two sources of water. Such systems 
are clean, renewable and low-impact – and they 
provide a steady source of energy. In contrast, the 
energy produced by renewables such as solar and 
wind power may fluctuate greatly during the course 
of a day, depending on weather conditions.
Although the concept was first proposed in 1975,14 
osmotic power systems could not be adopted at the 
time due to limitations of membrane performance, 
including inadequate flows through the membrane 
and insufficient power produced even in larger area 
systems.15 To address both issues, recent advances 
have yielded new materials,16,17 and system designs18 
that facilitate flow through membranes. 
There are two general designs for osmotic power 
systems. One, called pressure retarded osmosis 
(PRO), uses a specially designed semipermeable 
membrane that only allows water to move from a low- 
to high-salinity environment. The increased amount 
of water on one side of the membrane generates a 
pressure difference that can be used to drive a turbine 
that spins a generator to produce electricity. 
Another type relies on reverse electrodialysis 
(RED),19 which uses ion-exchange membranes 
that selectively allow cations (positive charge) and 
anions (negative charge) to move to opposite sides 
of the membrane – the impetus to do so again 
being differences in the salt content between two 
sides of the membrane. That flow of charge in this 
instance directly generates electricity. 
These advances are both in lab trials and being 
developed into commercial power plants. One 
commercial effort, for instance, the OsmoRhône 
1 by Sweetch Energy, began system installations 
in 2024. A Danish company, SaltPower,20 
founded in 2015, already generates power using 
the super-concentrated salt solutions that well 
up from geothermal sites. In a form of circular 
economy, the Mega-ton Water System Project in 
Fukuoka, Japan21 extracts energy from a seawater 
desalination plant’s output of highly saline solution 
left over after purified water is produced.22 In 
addition to power generation, techniques such as 
RED have been shown to potentially be relevant to producing purified water, and recovering lithium, 
nitrogen and carbon dioxide (CO2) from the water 
employed in the process.
Remaining challenges to full emergence are 
largely technical and economic in nature. Previous 
generations of osmotic power stations suffered 
from membrane fouling and high costs, although 
recent advances have improved performance. 
The technology is otherwise based on clear and 
uncontroversial scientific principles for extracting 
energy from differences in salinity. Beyond licensing 
processes and effective environmental and social 
impact assessments, there appear to be relatively 
few hurdles to wide adoption once sufficient 
financial investments are made into osmotic 
power systems.Katherine Daniell 
Director and Professor, School of Cybernetics, 
Australian National University
Alison Lewis 
Dean of the Faculty of Engineering and 
the Built Environment, University of Cape Town
Boxed Icons
Establish demonstration projects – 
Create public-private partnerships to 
build pilot osmotic power plants in diverse 
geographic locations to validate the technology 
across different environments.Ecosystem readiness map
Boxed Icons
Develop community engagement 
programmes – Implement educational 
initiatives in potential host communities 
that clearly demonstrate osmotic power’s dual 
benefits for clean energy generation and 
water management.KEY ACTIONS TO ACHIEVE SCALE
TechnologicalSocial
Economic
EnvironmentalPolicy
 Image: 
Osmotic power generates 
steady, renewable energy 
from salinity differences, 
with advancing 
membranes improving 
efficiency and viability.
Credit: Midjourney 
and Studio Miko. 
Prompt (abbreviated): 
“Flow of energy between 
two sources of water, 
creating electricity.”
Read more: 
For more expert analysis, 
visit the osmotic power 
systems transformation 
map. Authored by: Odne 
Burheim.
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Strategic outlook 
Osmotic power systems
By Dubai Future Foundation
Osmotic power systems could offer a unique approach to 
energy generation, with the potential to generate 5,177 
terawatt-hours (TWh) annually – nearly a fifth of global 
electricity needs.23,24 If developed at scale, this technology 
might transform how societies manage water resources 
while simultaneously creating new energy generation 
capabilities across coastal and estuarine environments.
The most compelling opportunity lies in the technology’s 
ability to integrate energy production with water 
management. Utility companies might develop hybrid 
renewable systems that combine osmotic power with 
wind, solar and hydro technologies, creating more adaptive 
and resilient energy networks.25 Coastal and estuarine 
communities could particularly benefit from decentralized 
energy solutions that enhance local energy resilience.26
As the technology matures, it could reshape global 
approaches to resource management. The growing 
research momentum – with 281 research papers published 
between 2022 and 2024, compared to 263 between 1968 
and 2010 – suggests a critical inflection point.27 Investments 
like Sweetch Energy’s €25 million funding indicate 
increasing confidence in the technology’s potential.28
Equally transformative is the potential that extends beyond 
energy generation to enable new approaches to water 
treatment and resource recovery. Osmotic power technologies 
could enable new approaches to desalination while 
recovering critical resources like lithium during the process. 
This could create interconnected systems where water management, energy production and resource extraction 
become deeply integrated.29,30
Imagine a future where water-intensive industries 
view water not as a waste stream, but as a strategic 
resource platform. Communities might develop economic 
models that transform geographical constraints into 
opportunities. These industries could reimagine their 
infrastructure to generate multiple forms of value – energy, 
purified water and recovered materials – from each 
interaction with water.
To realize benefits at scale, the most innovative 
organizations will recognize osmotic power as more than 
an energy technology – it represents a potential platform for 
reimagining how water-intensive industries create economic 
value. A desalination plant could evolve from a cost centre 
to a multi-purpose resource generator, simultaneously 
producing energy, purified water and recoverable minerals 
– transforming infrastructure from a linear process to an 
adaptive, value-creating ecosystem.
By integrating osmotic power systems, societies could 
develop more resilient, sustainable approaches to resource 
management. This technology might help transform how 
energy is generated, water is treated and economic value 
is created – potentially enabling infrastructure that serves 
multiple functions simultaneously across water management 
and energy production.
 Related DFF megatrends: Materials and Energy Boundaries31
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Advanced nuclear technologies
Bringing next-generation nuclear 
to power progress.03
Energy demand is rapidly increasing, driven by 
the rise of electrified transport and emerging 
technologies like AI and a push for decarbonization 
to advance climate goals. Power grids globally must 
grow to meet the increased loads while maintaining 
reliability, resiliency and affordability. 
A renewed wave of technological innovation in 
nuclear energy is under way to address demands 
for green power options. Generation III reactors are 
primarily pressurized water-cooled reactors and 
incorporate accident-tolerant fuels and improved 
safety systems. In parallel, Generation IV reactors 
propose alternative cooling fluids, such as molten 
metals, molten salts or gases like helium. These 
alternative coolants operate at higher temperatures 
and lower pressures, simplify reactor designs, 
improve safety and reduce costs. 
There is also a growing trend towards reducing 
the scale of power plants, with designs allowing 
key components to be manufactured in a factory 
and then transported to site. These small modular 
reactors (SMRs) typically cover about one-third of 
the generating capacity of traditional nuclear power 
reactors.32 Deploying multiple identical SMRs to 
achieve power outputs eliminates the high costs and 
long design cycles of a bespoke reactor, making 
SMRs attractive for distributed power generation.
Nations are dedicating substantial public funds to 
support large-scale SMRs and alternative cooling 
designs.33 These investments extend to new fuel 
fabrication facilities and enrichment plants, making 
deployment possible by the end of this decade.34 
Currently, only a few countries are heavily investing 
in large reactors outside of Russia and China. Most 
notably, South Korea has 26 nuclear reactors, 
accounting for one-third of the country’s electricity,35 
and the United Arab Emirates’ Clean Energy 
Strategy involves investment of $163 billion by 2050 
to have half of its electricity come from nuclear and 
renewables.36 Two European Pressurised Reactors 
(EPRs) and two AP1000s in the US37 have also 
been brought online in recent years. 
In the SMR arena, Russia and China already have 
operational plants, while Western countries are 
rapidly advancing in design, construction and 
regulatory frameworks to establish a competitive 
industry. In November 2024, in collaboration with 
Accenture, the World Economic Forum published 
A Collaborative Framework for Accelerating Advanced 
Nuclear and Small Modular Reactor Deployment , which serves as a tool to align stakeholders on key 
actions required to achieve the deployment of this 
key technology.
While the immediate future of nuclear deployment 
lies in fission reactors, the long-term goal for many 
is nuclear fusion, or the process of fusing hydrogen 
atoms to form helium, which releases enormous 
amounts of energy – the same mechanism that 
powers the sun. Although no net power gain has 
yet been achieved, there is high confidence that 
within one to two decades, this near-limitless 
source of clean energy will mature.
This shift towards advanced nuclear technologies, 
combined with enhanced renewable energy 
strategies and improved energy storage solutions, 
underscores the global urgency of transitioning 
away from fossil fuels and securing a sustainable, 
zero-carbon future.Doug Arent 
Executive Director, National Renewable 
Energy Laboratory Foundation
Karen Hallberg 
Principal Researcher, Bariloche 
Atomic Center (CONICET)Bernard Meyerson 
Chief Innovation Officer Emeritus, IBM
Boxed Icons
Launch community-focused 
safety demonstrations – Develop 
educational programmes showcasing 
the enhanced safety features of new nuclear 
designs through transparent demonstrations 
and community engagement.Ecosystem readiness map
Boxed Icons
Accelerate prototype testing – Fund 
comprehensive testing programmes 
for next-generation nuclear designs, 
particularly gas-cooled reactors, to validate 
safety systems and operational efficiency 
under various conditions.KEY ACTIONS TO ACHIEVE SCALE
TechnologicalSocial
EconomicEnvironmentalPolicy
 Image: 
Advanced nuclear 
technologies support rising 
clean energy demands 
and decarbonization goals.
Credit: Midjourney 
and Studio Miko. 
Prompt (abbreviated): 
“Nuclear reaction creating 
a swirl of energy.”
Read more: 
For more expert analysis, 
visit the advanced nuclear 
technologies transformation 
map. Authored by: Sergei 
Dudarev, Wenxi Tian.
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Strategic outlook 
Advanced nuclear technologies
By Dubai Future Foundation
Advanced nuclear technologies, particularly SMRs and 
gas-cooled reactors, offer a promising path to clean, 
reliable power. These technologies combine flexible siting 
with enhanced safety compared to traditional nuclear 
plants, positioning them as key enablers of a sustainable 
energy future.
By 2030, SMRs could redefine how power is delivered. 
These factory-built units are capable of serving remote 
communities or being added to existing industrial sites, 
expanding access to steady, zero-carbon electricity. This 
flexibility helps support the integration of variable renewable 
energy sources, and their modular design boosts grid 
stability. SMRs extend nuclear technology’s reach to areas 
previously unreachable for traditional large-scale plants.38 
In parallel with SMRs, gas-cooled reactors could redefine 
how power is delivered. They represent a significant 
opportunity to drive industrial decarbonization by providing 
high-temperature process heat (600-950°C) for challenging 
applications like hydrogen production and heavy industry. 
With these sectors contributing approximately 15% of 
global CO2 emissions,39,40 nuclear technology could help 
address emissions considered among the most difficult 
to abate. 
Looking further ahead, global nuclear capacity could double 
between 2020 and 2050 to support net-zero emissions 
goals.41 While high initial capital costs remain a challenge, 
the push for standardized reactor designs and economies 
of scale 42 offers a pathway to more affordable deployment.For advanced nuclear technologies to scale effectively, 
addressing supply chain and workforce challenges will be 
pivotal. Stable, sustainable access to specialized materials 
like radiation-resistant alloys, combined with overcoming 
the decline in nuclear engineering talent – highlighted by a 
25% decline in nuclear engineering graduates from 2012 
to 202243 – will be essential for maintaining momentum in 
reactor development and deployment.
Widespread adoption of advanced nuclear technology 
will hinge on rebuilding public trust through transparent 
communication and demonstrating the safety of next-gen 
reactors. Additionally, as plants become more digitalized, 
strong cybersecurity will be crucial to protecting infrastructure 
and ensuring secure, resilient power generation.
Countries leading in SMR deployment, including China, the 
UK and the US, are positioning themselves at the forefront 
of a new technological paradigm.44 Leadership in nuclear is 
now a marker of strategic technology capability.
Advanced nuclear technologies will likely follow distinct 
adoption pathways based on specific use cases rather 
than a single deployment model. SMRs may first serve 
remote communities and industrial facilities requiring reliable 
power independent of grid infrastructure, while advanced 
reactor designs may integrate into existing power grids as 
replacements for retiring conventional plants. The greatest 
value lies where nuclear intersects with renewables, 
hydrogen and industrial decarbonization. 
 Related DFF megatrends: Materials and Energy Boundaries45
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Engineered living therapeutics
Microbes designed to deliver 
therapies on demand.04
Engineered living therapeutics are advanced 
probiotic systems – such as microbes, cells and 
fungi associated with human health – that are being 
developed to produce therapeutic substances 
like drugs, enzymes and hormones in a controlled 
and sustainable manner. To enable this, the 
genetic code containing instructions for producing 
therapeutics is introduced into the systems. An 
important feature of this approach is the ability 
to include biological control mechanisms that 
regulate therapeutic production – either through 
patient-managed triggers or in response to specific, 
clinically recognized disease signals – ensuring 
precise and safe activation.46
Production within the patient promises to overcome 
crucial shortcomings of conventional medications, 
especially for high-cost biopharmaceuticals. These 
drugs are currently produced in laboratory settings 
using modified cell lines, followed by extensive 
purification, processing and formulation. Producing 
therapeutics directly in the body avoids the need for 
these downstream steps, which typically account 
for 70% of production costs.47 Further, for drugs 
requiring frequent administration through injections, 
sustained production within the patient would 
ensure prolonged and stable drug supply and 
increased patient adherence to treatment, where 
crucial, as in the treatment of diabetes.
These developments are made possible by 
advances in synthetic biology and genetic 
engineering, with ongoing research receiving 
attention in the US, Europe and China. Several 
companies are now developing this technology for 
commercial use. For example, Chariot Bioscience in 
the US is exploring microbial platforms that release 
therapeutics into the bloodstream following a single 
dose, significantly reducing the need for repeated 
injections.48 Finnish company Aurealis Therapeutics 
is conducting phase II clinical trials using modified 
probiotic lactic acid bacteria to simultaneously 
produce three therapeutic proteins in the treatment 
of diabetic foot ulcers.49 NEC is conducting 
clinical phase I/II trials using a weakened strain of 
Salmonella bacteria to facilitate activation of the 
patient’s immune system to fight cancer cells.50Importantly, safety is a central focus. Developers are 
actively addressing concerns such as unintended 
genetic transfer, immune responses and environmental 
release.51 Promising approaches currently in the 
research phase are metabolic and genetic programmes 
that prevent growth or kill bacteria on command, or the 
safe encapsulation into polymer-based containers.52 
Beyond scientific and technological advancements, 
regulatory frameworks – such as the Advanced Therapy 
Medicinal Products in Europe – need to be developed 
to enable health authorities to evaluate efficacy and 
safety and ultimately grant market approval.Thomas Hartung 
Professor, Doerenkamp Zbinden Chair for 
Evidence-based Toxicology, Johns Hopkins 
Bloomberg School of Public Health
Sang-Yup Lee 
Senior Vice-President, Research; 
Distinguished Professor, Korea Advanced 
Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)Wilfried Weber 
Scientific Director and Professor for New Materials, 
Leibniz Institute for New Materials
Create regulatory sandboxes – Establish 
specialized regulatory frameworks that 
allow for controlled testing of engineered 
living therapeutics while developing permanent 
safety guidelines.Ecosystem readiness map
Boxed Icons
Launch patient-centred communication 
initiatives – Develop clear, accessible 
information resources that explain 
the science, benefits and safeguards of 
genetically modified therapeutics to patients 
and healthcare providers.KEY ACTIONS TO ACHIEVE SCALE
TechnologicalSocial
Economic
EnvironmentalPolicy
 Image: 
Engineered living 
therapeutics use 
programmed microbes to 
produce drugs inside the 
body, reducing costs and 
improving treatment.
Credit: Midjourney 
and Studio Miko. 
Prompt (abbreviated): 
“Web-like structure, 
growing fungi and 
living organisms.”
Read more: 
For more expert analysis, 
visit the engineered living 
therapeutics transformation 
map. Authored by: Jean 
Marie François.
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Strategic outlook 
Engineered living therapeutics
By Dubai Future Foundation
Engineered living therapeutics represent a promising 
reimagining of medicine, not as a conventional treatment 
but as a living system inside the body. This approach 
could shift drug production from pharmaceutical facilities 
to biological processes within patients, potentially opening 
new frontiers in how and where healing occurs.
For healthcare systems globally, this represents a potential 
solution to persistent distribution challenges. As living 
therapeutics enable localized, capsule-based or food-
embedded treatments, traditional manufacturing and 
distribution models will be redefined, prompting a shift to 
decentralized production and the repurposing of existing 
pharmaceutical infrastructure for broader accessibility in 
areas previously deemed inaccessible.
For patients, the transformation extends beyond convenience 
to fundamentally alter the experience of managing chronic 
conditions. The current paradigm could evolve towards 
treatment approaches that operate seamlessly in the 
background of daily life. The psychological burden of 
constant health management could diminish as treatments 
become more autonomous and adaptive, potentially 
improving not just clinical outcomes but overall quality of life.
The pharmaceutical landscape could undergo significant 
transformation. Pharmaceutical corporations, biotechnology 
firms and research universities are likely to lead the 
development of living therapeutics, with new players such 
as dairy and probiotics manufacturers possibly entering the 
field. Mergers between non-traditional partners may emerge 
as this field evolves, with some researchers exploring the 
potential for carefully regulated probiotic-based platforms 
to support future consumer health applications.
The integration with wearable technologies could create 
feedback loops between therapeutic organisms and external 
monitoring systems. Wearable technologies may further 
enhance this by enabling precise, real-time monitoring of 
bacterial therapy, ensuring both safety and efficacy. Scaling 
this technology will require advancements at the intersection 
of AI, biotechnology and health technology. AI is expected 
to support the safe and targeted design of bacterial 
functions, helping optimize their therapeutic performance 
and compatibility with the human body under tightly 
controlled clinical conditions. The convergence of biology 
and technology, both in bacterial production and real-time 
product monitoring, will be key to living therapeutics.Strategic preparation requires addressing several critical 
challenges. The ability to terminate microbial activity on 
demand will be needed to mitigate risks of uncontrolled 
replication or unintended genetic transfer. Researchers 
are exploring innovative safety mechanisms, such as 
externally activated, light-responsive bacterial systems,53 
that may offer additional layers of control compared to 
traditional ingestion-based shutdown methods. Regulatory 
frameworks are a critical part of responsible development, 
with structured sandbox environments offering a way to test 
these innovations under defined conditions, while ensuring 
robust ethical oversight and public accountability.
Decision-makers face a pivotal moment in healthcare’s 
evolution. Organizations that proactively invest in engineered 
living therapeutics will be positioned to: 
 Transform chronic disease management 
from episodic treatment to continuous care
 Redesign pharmaceutical supply chains 
for enhanced accessibility and resilience 
 Create localized production systems that reduce 
dependence on centralized manufacturing
 Develop new treatment modalities that respond 
dynamically to individual patient physiology
 Pioneer regulatory frameworks that balance 
innovation with appropriate safeguards
Over the next decade, healthcare organizations, 
pharmaceutical companies and biotechnology firms 
that engage with the development of engineered living 
therapeutics may contribute to a meaningful evolution 
in how medicine is delivered and experienced. 
Progress would likely depend on collaboration across 
synthetic biology, AI, clinical medicine, patient advocacy 
and regulatory science to explore a future where treatments 
might adapt to patients rather than patients adapting 
to treatments.
 Related DFF megatrends: Future Humanity and Advanced 
Health and Nutrition54
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
GLP-1s for 
neurodegenerative disease
Activating brain pathways 
for longer, healthier lives.05
A recent class of drugs originally developed for type 
2 diabetes and obesity management – technically 
known as glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists 
(GLP-1RAs) – is now being explored for its potential 
in treating neurodegenerative conditions such as 
Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease. Early research 
suggests that these drugs may have neuroprotective 
properties, including anti-inflammatory, antioxidant 
and insulin-sensitizing effects that could slow or 
modify disease progression.55
GLP-1RAs, once administered, cross the blood-
brain barrier and interact with the brain’s neurons 
and glial cells. They have been shown to reduce 
inflammation and promote the removal of toxic 
proteins, both of which, if left untreated, are 
linked to the development of Alzheimer’s and 
Parkinson’s.56 This class of drugs has also been 
shown to enhance brain cell longevity and energy 
regulation, which may improve cognitive and motor 
function. Newer formulations are being developed 
to improve delivery to the brain, with the aim of 
enhancing their potential therapeutic effects.57
Preliminary observational data from use in the 
general population58 have suggested possible 
associations with improved outcomes in individuals 
living with neurodegenerative conditions. Initial 
clinical studies have shown mixed results, but 
with promising signals. At present, the long-term 
potential of GLP-1RAs remains optimistic, but 
sophisticated, rigorous clinical trials are required, 
and are now under way, to confirm this and 
establish optimal protocols for drug use with 
desired outcomes.
If proven effective in treating Alzheimer’s and 
Parkinson’s disease, GLP-1s could have 
tremendous global economic impact. With over 
55 million people living with dementia, the global 
market for GLP-1 drugs is projected to grow to 
$55.7 billion by 2031.59 Similarly, benefitting society, the emotional and monetary costs associated 
with caring for and treating those living with these 
diseases would drop dramatically.
Regulatory approval remains a hurdle, as long-
term clinical efficacy data are needed. Additionally, 
high drug costs may limit access, requiring policy 
interventions for affordability. Careful safety 
monitoring is essential, particularly regarding weight 
loss in frail patients. As advanced clinical trials 
continue, GLP-1RAs are being closely studied for their 
potential to improve outcomes in neurodegenerative 
diseases. While early research is encouraging, future 
impact will depend on the strength of emerging 
evidence and continued collaboration across the 
scientific, regulatory and healthcare communities.Thomas Hartung 
Professor, Doerenkamp Zbinden Chair for 
Evidence-based Toxicology, Johns Hopkins 
Bloomberg School of Public Health
Boxed Icons
Expand specialized clinical trials – Design 
and implement phase II/III clinical trials 
specifically focused on neurodegenerative 
applications of GLP-1RAs with longer duration to 
capture disease modification effects.Ecosystem readiness map
KEY ACTIONS TO ACHIEVE SCALE
TechnologicalSocial
EconomicEnvironmentalPolicy Image: 
GLP-1RAs show promise 
for treating Alzheimer’s 
and Parkinson’s by 
reducing inflammation and 
improving brain health.
Credit: Midjourney 
and Studio Miko. 
Prompt (abbreviated): 
“Close-up of synapses 
connecting with flowing, 
orange energy.”
Read more: 
For more expert analysis, 
visit the GLP-1s for 
neurodegenerative 
disease transformation 
map. Authored by: Thomas 
Hartung and Jeff M.P . Holley.
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Strategic outlook 
GLP-1s for neurodegenerative disease
By Dubai Future Foundation
The repurposing of GLP-1RAs for neurodegenerative 
diseases could catalyse a significant shift in the approach to 
conditions that have long defined late-life decline. As early-
stage research explores the potential of these medications 
for Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease60,61 – affecting 
nearly 50 million people globally62,63 – their future impact, 
if validated, could extend beyond clinical outcomes to 
influence approaches to healthcare delivery, eldercare and 
societal expectations of ageing.
Over the next decade, healthcare delivery systems could 
begin a meaningful transition towards earlier intervention 
and disease modification rather than symptom management 
alone. This evolution could gradually reshape eldercare 
infrastructure, potentially reducing demand for intensive 
memory care while creating new care models focused 
on maintaining function and independence. Healthcare 
economics could shift as resources reallocate from late-stage 
care towards prevention and early intervention, potentially 
improving outcomes while creating new value pathways.
The societal impact could be substantial. For patients in early 
disease stages, even modest delays in progression could 
translate to additional years of independence and family 
engagement. If future treatments prove effective in slowing 
disease progression, this could ease caregiving demands 
and potentially support greater workforce participation and 
financial stability for caregivers – who are often women. 
This may also help older adults remain active and engaged 
for longer, potentially supporting social continuity and 
intergenerational connection within communities.
Supply chains for this emerging class of drugs are 
under pressure as demand grows.64,65 Several major pharmaceutical firms have announced large-scale 
investments aimed at expanding manufacturing capacity 
– reflecting interest in the potential of GLP-1 therapies 
and the significant innovation required to meet evolving 
production needs.
Affordability remains a key challenge. With high costs and 
limited reimbursement in many settings,66,67 GLP-1RAs 
may present immediate cost tensions despite potential 
long-term savings in care needs.68 This raises important 
questions around pricing models that better balance 
immediate expenses against future benefits, potentially 
accelerating broader reforms in how healthcare systems 
value preventive interventions.
Given the promising but mixed results from recent clinical 
trials,69 GLP-1RAs are being explored as a potential 
component of future therapeutic strategies – pending 
further clinical validation. Complementary approaches like 
GIP (glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide) receptor 
agonists70 are also under investigation, contributing to a 
potentially more personalized and stage-specific therapeutic 
landscape as clinical understanding evolves.
The potential of GLP-1RAs is currently being explored 
for their role in shifting the treatment approach to 
neurodegenerative diseases – from symptom management 
towards possible disease modification. If future research 
supports this direction, it could influence how healthcare 
systems and societies approach ageing and cognitive 
health, with broader implications for care models and 
community support structures.
 Related DFF megatrends: Future Humanity and Advanced 
Health and Nutrition71
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Autonomous biochemical sensing
Wiring biological sensors 
for real-time insight.06
Autonomous biochemical sensors are analytical 
devices that autonomously and continuously detect 
and quantify specific biochemical parameters, such 
as disease markers for patient-individualized health 
management or chemical changes in soil or water 
for environmental management.
They detect the chemical of interest using tailored 
physicochemical transducers or bio-based sensors 
employing enzymes, antibodies or even engineered 
living cells. These sensors are designed to operate 
and report findings independently, without the 
need for human intervention. They employ wireless 
communication and energy harvesting, through self-
sustaining power sources such as biofuel cells,72 
to enable real-time continuous monitoring. As data 
from these sensors can be retrieved remotely, 
they are suitable for applications in difficult-to-
reach areas or remote locations. This enables the 
continuous monitoring of human health as well as 
environmental conditions.
While typical sensors, such as well-known 
COVID-19 tests, are single-use, the challenge in 
autonomous biochemical sensing is to achieve 
continuous monitoring and electronic data 
capture. Such technical limitations have restricted 
autonomous biochemical sensors to very specific 
applications. The most successful to date is the 
wearable glucose sensor, which measures glucose 
concentration in real time and communicates 
with a smartphone73 that controls an insulin pump 
to stabilize glucose levels. Some of the biggest 
companies investing in the development and 
manufacturing of such technologies include Abbott 
Laboratories, Roche and DuPont. 
Due to simultaneous advancements in materials 
science, nanotechnologies, bio-mimetics and 
wireless technologies, autonomous biochemical 
sensing is emerging to address other targets 
and applications. An example is the inclusion 
of an active-reset function in a wearable sensor 
for inflammation markers, enabling continuous 
monitoring instead of a single use.74 US-based 
Persperity Health is developing wearables for 
continuous monitoring of female hormones for 
ovulation tracking, fertility treatments and menopause 
care. In ongoing development are microbial whole-
cell biosensors, employing microbes that produce 
or deplete an enzyme when they encounter what they are targeted to detect, that enzyme being 
their means of signalling “detection”.
These emerging forms of this technology have 
the potential to transform the lives of many 
people requiring continuous monitoring of specific 
health conditions. Processes for food safety and 
environmental monitoring, particularly for early 
detection of contamination, could also lead to 
significant social and environmental benefits.
Many sensors still have short lifespans, requiring 
regular replacement. However, new generations of 
sensors are likely to see improvements that reduce 
costs. Microbial whole-cell biosensors face additional 
regulatory hurdles and ethical challenges compared 
to conventional medical or environmental sensing 
devices, as they are genetically engineered biological 
organisms with the potential for environmental release.Katherine Daniell 
Director and Professor, School of Cybernetics, 
Australian National University
Wilfried Weber 
Scientific Director and Professor for New 
Materials, Leibniz Institute for New Materials
Establish ethical guidelines for biological 
sensors – Develop clear industry standards 
for privacy, data ownership and biological 
safety in partnership with bioethics organizations 
and regulatory bodies.Ecosystem readiness map
Boxed Icons
Conduct public demonstrations of 
non-invasive applications – Showcase 
environmental and agricultural 
applications of biochemical sensing to build 
public comfort with the technology before 
expanding to healthcare use.KEY ACTIONS TO ACHIEVE SCALE
TechnologicalSocial
Economic EnvironmentalPolicy
 Image: 
Autonomous biochemical 
sensors enable continuous, 
remote health and 
environmental monitoring 
using self-powered, 
wireless, bio-based 
technologies.
Credit: Midjourney 
and Studio Miko. 
Prompt (abbreviated): 
“Microbe floating above a 
micro piece of technology.”
Read more: 
For more expert analysis, 
visit the autonomous 
biochemical sensing 
transformation map. 
Authored by: Dermont 
Diamond.
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Strategic outlook 
Autonomous biochemical sensing
By Dubai Future Foundation
Autonomous biochemical sensing could enhance the ability 
to safeguard health across multiple scales – from individual 
well-being to ecosystem vitality. These systems – evolving 
from operator-dependent instruments into self-sufficient, 
predictive networks75 – offer the potential to monitor 
and respond to biological and chemical signals without 
human intervention, creating more robust protection for 
communities, food systems and natural environments.
Self-operating sensing networks could fundamentally 
reshape early warning systems across critical infrastructure. 
Environmental protection agencies could transition from 
periodic sampling to continuous, real-time detection networks 
that identify pollutants, pathogens and toxins without human 
intervention.76 This shift from reactive to proactive monitoring 
could enable response systems that address contamination 
events hours or days earlier, potentially preventing widespread 
exposure rather than merely documenting it.
Food safety systems stand to undergo a similar 
transformation. With sensors capable of detecting food 
toxins 1,000 times more sensitively in under 60 seconds,77 
supply chains could implement continuous verification rather 
than batch testing. This evolution would alter both regulatory 
frameworks and production economics, potentially reducing 
the scale and frequency of food recalls78 while enabling more 
precise traceability throughout global distribution networks.
Healthcare delivery models could experience significant 
reconfiguration as biochemical sensing advances. The 
decentralization of diagnostics through wearable and point-
of-care biosensors would extend testing capabilities beyond 
traditional healthcare facilities into homes and remote 
communities.79 This distribution of diagnostic intelligence 
could fundamentally alter care pathways, enabling earlier 
intervention while generating vast streams of population-
level health data.
The technological challenges, while substantial, 
are addressable. Balancing molecular-level sensitivity 
with long-term stability remains difficult in natural environments where competing microbiomes affect 
sensor performance.80,81 For example, engineered 
bacterial sensors for TNT (trinitrotoluene) detection 
maintain effectiveness for several weeks before declining 
significantly.82 These biological constraints necessitate 
innovations in sensor design that draw inspiration from 
natural systems through biomimicry.83
Beyond physical sensor design, data integration represents 
another critical area of advancement. As autonomous 
sensing networks generate continuous molecular 
information across multiple domains, the resulting data 
streams will require new analytical frameworks and 
governance models. The privacy and security implications, 
particularly for health-related sensing, demand regulatory 
approaches that balance innovation with the protection of 
sensitive information.84
The convergence of continuous monitoring capabilities 
across environmental, food safety and healthcare domains 
suggests a future where molecular detection becomes 
an integrated layer of everyday infrastructure rather than 
a specialized function. Organizations that successfully 
implement autonomous biochemical sensing will likely move 
beyond applying these technologies to isolated problems 
and instead develop interconnected monitoring networks 
that share data across traditional boundaries. This integration 
would create new capabilities: environmental contaminants 
could be traced to their source and linked to potential 
health impacts in real-time; foodborne pathogens might 
be detected and contained before reaching consumers; 
and early disease indicators could trigger preventive 
interventions before symptoms appear. 
The organizations that will lead in this space will be those that 
address not just the technical challenges of sensor design 
but also the complex data governance and cross-domain 
collaboration requirements that enable these technologies 
to function as a cohesive system rather than isolated tools.
 Related DFF megatrends: Future Humanity and Advanced 
Health and Nutrition85
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Green nitrogen fixation
Reimagining ammonia production 
for a net-zero future.07
Nitrogen fixation, a $200 billion market in the 
US alone, converts atmospheric nitrogen into 
ammonia at a scale of more than 150 million tonnes 
per year, which is needed to produce fertilizer 
supporting 50% of the world’s food production.86 
Green nitrogen fixation now aims to reduce the 
significant carbon footprint of conventional nitrogen 
production, which currently accounts for 2% of 
global energy consumption.87
In nitrogen fixation, microorganisms convert 
nitrogen in the atmosphere into forms that plants 
and other organisms can use for nutrients, primarily 
ammonia. The key challenge in nitrogen fixation 
is breaking the extremely stable triple bond that 
holds together the two nitrogen atoms that make 
up atmospheric nitrogen (N2). In the state-of-
the-art Haber-Bosch process, this step requires 
temperatures of 400-500°C, pressures 130 to 
150 times greater than that found in the Earth’s 
atmosphere, and hydrogen primarily sourced from 
natural gas88 in a CO2-generating reaction. 
While the principle of alternative nitrogen fixation 
was discovered in the 1930s, only recently has 
there been considerable progress towards large-
scale commercialization. For example, bio-based 
approaches use engineered bacteria and enzymes 
to fix nitrogen89 and sunlight, or green electricity can 
provide energy and reduction equivalents. Bio-inspired 
systems also show promising results, replicating 
enzyme function by inorganic polyoxometalates or 
anionic metal-oxide clusters.90 Further, electrochemical 
technologies relying on lithium as mediators are at 
the brink of commercial application.91 
Green nitrogen fixation technologies are currently 
being explored by both established and start-
up companies. Australian Jupiter Ionics is 
spearheading lithium-based nitrogen fixation 
technology, whereas California-based Ammobia 
is focusing on new, more efficient catalysts. 
Such alternative technologies would also allow 
decentralized production plants, enabling ammonia 
to be generated using locally abundant renewable 
energy, such as wind and solar. The ammonia 
produced locally could then be efficiently stored 
and/or processed into fertilizer on-site,92 saving 
transport energy and costs.
Progress in creating localized green ammonia 
production would not only reduce ammonia 
production’s carbon footprint but also would reduce related CO2 sources, such as in required 
transport.93 Means of transport will also benefit, as 
commercial vessels are already employing ammonia 
as diesel fuel and estimates project that more than 
30% of global marine fuel could be carbon-free 
ammonia by 2050.94
Next-gen technologies employing lithium chemistry 
or biology-based approaches to nitrogen fixation are 
being explored, but their commercial viability has yet 
to be established.95 In contrast, ammonia production 
plants using green hydrogen instead of natural gas 
have proven viable and are currently being scaled 
globally.96 The ammonia industry is in a transition,97 
where increasing R&D efforts in green ammonia 
fixation technology paired with an increasing demand 
(as, for example, from the transport sector) will spark 
additional innovation and investment towards net-
zero carbon ammonia production.Javier Garcia-Martinez 
Professor, Director of the Molecular 
Nanotechnology Lab, University of Alicante
Krishna Kumar 
Chief Executive Officer, Cropin Sage Sang-Yup Lee 
Senior Vice-President, Research; Distinguished 
Professor, Korea Advanced Institute of Science 
and Technology (KAIST)
Wilfried Weber 
Scientific Director and Professor for New 
Materials, Leibniz Institute for New Materials
Boxed Icons
Build industry-agriculture partnerships 
– Create focused collaborations between 
green nitrogen technology developers 
and major agricultural stakeholders to establish 
pilot programmes demonstrating cost and 
environmental benefits.Ecosystem readiness map
Boxed Icons
 Accelerate alternative process 
technologies – Invest in targeted research 
to improve lithium-mediated and biological 
nitrogen fixation methods to provide viable 
alternatives to traditional processes.KEY ACTIONS TO ACHIEVE SCALE
TechnologicalSocial
Economic EnvironmentalPolicy
 Image: 
Green nitrogen fixation 
uses renewable energy 
and biology to produce 
ammonia sustainably, 
reducing emissions and 
enabling local production.
Credit: Midjourney 
and Studio Miko. 
Prompt (abbreviated): 
“Highly detailed green bio 
fibres interweaving and 
connecting.”
Read more: 
For more expert analysis, 
visit the green nitrogen 
fixation transformation map. 
Authored by: Hailong Li 
and Zequn Yang.
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Strategic outlook 
Green nitrogen fixation
By Dubai Future Foundation
The Haber-Bosch process, developed over a century ago, 
fundamentally altered humanity’s relationship with food 
production by enabling industrial-scale nitrogen fixation. 
Now, lithium-mediated electrochemical processes could 
present another significant advancement: the potential ability 
to produce ammonia using only air, water and renewable 
electricity. This technological shift might transform global 
ammonia production from a centralized, carbon-intensive 
industry into a more distributed, carbon-neutral network.
The strategic significance extends far beyond 
decarbonization. The current Haber-Bosch process 
consumes 1-2% of global energy98 and emits 2.4 tons 
of CO2 per ton of ammonia produced – nearly twice 
that of steel production and four times that of cement 
manufacturing.99 Green ammonia production represents 
a critical opportunity to transform this carbon-intensive 
foundation of global agriculture while simultaneously 
enabling new energy applications.
Agriculture stands to undergo the most profound 
transformation. With nearly 80% of industrially produced 
ammonia consumed in fertilizers,100 green nitrogen fixation 
could catalyse a shift towards distributed, smaller-scale 
production facilities that reduce transport vulnerabilities, 
stabilize fertilizer prices101 and enhance food system 
resilience. This distributed model could fundamentally 
reshape agricultural supply chains and empower regions 
currently dependent on imported fertilizers.
Beyond agriculture, green ammonia emerges as a 
versatile energy carrier with strategic advantages over 
liquid hydrogen. With storage requirements up to 30 times 
lower in cost than liquid hydrogen,102 ammonia presents 
a more practical medium for hydrogen energy storage 
and transport. The shipping industry has recognized this potential, with maritime regulations evolving to 
accommodate ammonia-fuelled vessels, suggesting a 
pathway towards decarbonizing global shipping networks.
While offering advantages over hydrogen in the Haber-
Bosch process, technical and resource challenges 
remain significant but navigable. Recent advances have 
demonstrated electrochemical conversion rates approaching 
the efficiency of the Haber-Bosch process (60-75%),103,104,105 
indicating technical viability. The dependence on lithium 
– a critical mineral with demand expected to more than 
double by 2030106 – presents a resource constraint that will 
require strategic supply chain development. Environmental 
considerations must also address ammonia’s toxicity107 and 
potential PM2.5 (particulate matter) emissions impacts.108
Strategically, the geopolitical landscape of ammonia 
production currently stands at a pivotal moment. With China 
currently accounting for 30% of global production and India 
and Middle Eastern countries poised to expand capacity,109 
green nitrogen fixation could reshape regional dependencies 
and create new centres of agricultural and energy influence. 
Those who develop scalable green ammonia production 
capabilities may gain significant strategic advantages in 
both food security and clean energy transitions.
Over the next decade, leadership in green nitrogen fixation 
would likely emerge from those who can integrate three 
distinct strategic capabilities: advanced electrochemical 
manufacturing, renewable energy infrastructure and 
agricultural innovation ecosystems. The technology 
represents a potential convergence where food security, 
energy innovation and climate action might intersect in a 
single transformative platform.
 Related DFF megatrends: Evolving Ecosystems and Advanced 
Health and Nutrition110
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Nanozymes
Replicating nature’s catalysts 
for health and environmental 
breakthroughs.08
Nanozymes are laboratory-produced and 
manufactured nanomaterials with enzyme-like 
properties. Nanozymes, unlike enzymes, which 
are produced by living organisms or chemically 
synthesized at significant cost and complexity, 
offer increased stability, lower production costs 
and simpler synthesis processes.111 Composed 
of nanoparticles of metals, metal oxides, carbon 
and other materials, nanozymes act like catalysts 
and promote the same chemical reactions 
enzymes support.112 Their robust nature allows 
them to function in far more diverse environments, 
expanding their potential applications in biomedical, 
environmental and industrial fields. Using advanced 
nanoscale design and production techniques, it is 
also possible to engineer multifunctional nanozymes. 
Rapid advancements in nanozyme technology in 
the last two decades have garnered significant 
attention from major pharmaceutical companies, 
resulting in a surge of investment in nanozyme 
research and development. This increased funding 
has accelerated the pace of innovation and 
expanded the potential applications of nanozymes 
across various medical fields. Therefore, numerous 
clinical trials for nanozyme-based therapies are 
currently in progress, with particularly promising 
results emerging in the areas of cancer and 
neurodegenerative disease treatment.113 In cancer 
treatment, nanozymes have shown potential for 
targeted drug delivery, enhancing the efficacy of 
chemotherapy while reducing side effects. For 
neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s 
and Parkinson’s, nanozymes are being explored 
for their ability to mitigate oxidative stress and 
reduce inflammation in the brain, potentially slowing 
disease progression. The versatility of nanozymes 
has also led to investigations in other medical 
areas, including cardiovascular diseases, infectious 
diseases and wound healing. 
Several companies and start-ups are actively 
working towards the commercialization of 
nanozymes. Level Nine is developing nanozymes 
for use in industrial biomanufacturing.114 Nanozyme, 
Inc., a University of Florida spin-out, is developing 
synthetic nanomachines programmed to enter 
only targeted diseased cells, with the goal of 
enabling targeted disease treatment with fewer 
side effects.115 Though a work in progress, barring 
unanticipated challenges, such programmes are 
hoped to mature into commercial applications in 
the coming years. 
The impact of nanozymes extends well beyond 
healthcare to environmental applications, including 
water purification, potentially offering sustainable 
solutions to a critical global challenge. In the food industry, they could enhance food safety through 
the rapid detection of contaminants in on-shelf 
packaged meats and other consumables.116 In 
industrial catalysis, nanozymes may offer more 
efficient and environmentally friendly alternatives 
to traditional catalysts, potentially reducing energy 
consumption and waste materials.117 
The global nanozyme market, valued at $5.13 
billion in 2024, is projected to grow at a compound 
annual growth rate (CAGR) of 27.4% to reach 
$57.95 billion by 2034.118 Key applications include 
biosensing, environmental remediation and targeted 
drug delivery. Nanozymes promise to revolutionize 
diagnostics and therapeutics, particularly in areas 
such as early disease detection and targeted drug 
delivery. This convergence of nanotechnology 
and enzyme mimicry has the potential to drive 
innovation across multiple sectors, ultimately 
contributing to improved quality of life. 
As with all emergent technologies, nanozymes 
face several challenges. Technical hurdles include 
improving their selectivity and catalytic efficiency 
to match or exceed natural enzymes. Ethical 
considerations arise from their potential use in 
biological systems, requiring thorough safety 
evaluations. Finally, the regulatory framework 
for nanozyme-based products is still evolving, 
which could impact their commercialization and 
widespread adoption.Javier Garcia-Martinez 
Professor, Director of the Molecular Nanotechnology 
Lab, University of AlicanteAndrew Maynard 
Professor, School for the Future of Innovation 
in Society, Arizona State University
Boxed Icons
Establish biocompatibility testing 
frameworks – Create standardized 
protocols for assessing the safety and 
biological interaction of nanozymes across different 
application environments to address ethical concerns.Ecosystem readiness map
KEY ACTIONS TO ACHIEVE SCALE
TechnologicalSocial
EconomicEnvironmentalPolicy
 Image: 
Nanozymes are synthetic 
enzyme-like nanomaterials 
offering stable, low-cost 
and versatile solutions 
across medicine and 
industry.
Credit: Midjourney 
and Studio Miko. 
Prompt (abbreviated): 
“Clusters of matte circles, 
varying in sizes.”
Read more: 
For more expert analysis, 
visit the nanozymes 
transformation map. 
Authored by: Sanjay Singh.
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Strategic outlook 
Nanozymes
By Dubai Future Foundation
Nanozymes offer engineered alternatives to natural enzymes 
with distinct practical advantages: they can operate in 
extreme pH (potential of hydrogen) conditions, withstand 
high temperatures and maintain stability for extended 
periods while costing significantly less to produce. With 
demonstrated capabilities like detecting antioxidants at parts-
per-billion concentrations and achieving up to 21 times the 
catalytic efficiency of natural enzymes,119 these materials 
can enable chemical reactions in environments where 
biological enzymes would rapidly degrade. This combination 
of performance and stability opens possibilities across 
scientific and industrial applications that have previously 
been limited by the fragility of natural enzyme systems.
Healthcare and environmental applications demonstrate 
the technology’s transformative potential. Smartphone-
integrated diagnostic tools could expand medical 
capabilities in resource-constrained regions,120 enabling 
more sensitive biosensors for early disease detection.121 
Wound care technologies offer targeted treatments against 
drug-resistant bacteria, killing 99.99% of challenging 
infections without triggering resistance mechanisms.122
Beyond direct applications, secondary impact emerges 
in the global research ecosystem. Nanozymes require 
integrating AI, computational design and domain-specific 
expertise,123 potentially dissolving traditional disciplinary 
boundaries. International research networks might develop 
collaborative models that transcend geographical and 
institutional limitations, creating more adaptive approaches 
to addressing complex global challenges.
This collaborative potential could fundamentally alter how 
countries approach technological innovation. Shared 
research platforms might emerge, addressing critical global 
issues through integrated, multidisciplinary strategies. 
The technology’s capacity to reduce harmful chemical use124 suggests a new paradigm of environmentally 
conscious scientific development, where research 
simultaneously advances technological capabilities 
and environmental sustainability.
Significant challenges remain. Biocompatibility concerns 
and the need for robust safety standards create critical 
implementation hurdles.125,126 Developing comprehensive 
regulatory frameworks will require coordinated global efforts 
and a systematic approach to research and implementation. 
To address these challenges, the International Organization 
for Standardization’s (ISO) existing nanotechnology standards 
provide a foundation for this collaborative approach.127 
The development of nanozymes points towards a more 
precise approach to catalysis where reaction specificity, 
stability in diverse environments and recyclability become 
standard features rather than compromises. Initial 
applications in diagnostics, environmental remediation 
and targeted therapeutics will likely provide the proving 
grounds for these technologies, establishing performance 
benchmarks and regulatory precedents. 
The organizations best positioned for success will develop 
specialized nanozyme designs optimized for specific 
reaction environments – whether in industrial processes, 
biomedical applications or environmental contexts. 
Rather than competing with natural enzymes across all 
applications, successful nanozyme development will focus 
on addressing the specific limitations of biological catalysts: 
their instability in harsh conditions, high production costs 
and limited tunability. This targeted approach will create 
practical value while navigating the biocompatibility 
challenges and regulatory requirements that currently limit 
broader deployment.
 Related DFF megatrends: Materials and Advanced Health 
and Nutrition128
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Collaborative sensing
Empowering connected systems 
to make context-aware decisions.09
Sensing devices are now ubiquitous in people’s 
homes, vehicles and workplaces. Already useful in 
isolation, these distributed sensors are increasingly 
being connected to each other and integrated with AI-
infused systems, paving the way for rapid advances 
in collaborative sensing that can generate insights to 
improve the capabilities of individual sensors. Beyond 
autonomous urban mobility, promising applications for 
collaborative sensing are diverse, including perceptive 
mobile networks that combine communications and 
sensing on the same network. Collaborative sensing 
will reshape how cities operate and how organizations 
use information to make decisions. 
Promising applications for collaborative sensing 
are diverse, including improving urban mobility. For 
example, connected traffic lights can dynamically 
adjust themselves based on traffic cameras 
and environmental sensors to manage urban 
congestion and emission levels. Other examples 
for collaborative sensing include large-scale 
autonomous mapping in mines,129 analysing storm 
systems,130 drone swarms,131 internet-of-things-
based structural health monitoring,132 environmental 
monitoring and bringing more precision to 
agriculture and natural resource management.133  
Collaborative sensing pairs distributed sensors, 
including those on satellites and underwater and 
subterranean platforms, with reliable connectivity 
and algorithmic processing at the network’s edge 
to reduce transmitted data volumes. Autonomous 
agents, such as robots, drones, intelligent vehicles 
and IT systems, with semantic reasoning and dynamic 
planning capabilities, will be equipped to navigate 
unfamiliar environments and make collective decisions. 
Research in sensor fusion, collaborative sensing 
and collaborative autonomy has often been driven 
by the defence industries’ need for real-time 
decisions and actions. Increasingly, the civilian 
benefits of these linked capabilities are becoming 
apparent. Imagine an autonomous vehicle that 
drives appropriately in the context of its own 
sensors, and that also knows (thanks to connected 
sensors on a traffic light hundreds of yards away) 
that a speeding vehicle is approaching on a 
collision course. The US Federal Communications 
Commission’s (FCC) recent decision134 to adopt 
the 5.9 gigahertz (GHz) band for cellular-vehicle-
to-everything technology is a critical step towards 
enabling such advances and will create new 
opportunities to explore how collaborative sensing 
might address infrastructure costs, reduce traffic 
congestion and accidents and lower carbon 
emissions. The European Commission and China’s 
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology 
have similarly enacted enabling legislation. Challenges remain. Most platforms on which sensors 
are deployed have strict power and connectivity 
constraints, requiring engineering approaches such 
as compressing 3D scene classification methods,135 
improved navigation136 in the absence of GPS and 
improved low-power processing at the network 
edge. Data-sharing security and privacy policies will 
also need to evolve. 
The key to unlocking the benefits of collaborative 
sensing at scale and achieving true collaborative 
autonomy, will be multi-modal algorithms137 that 
can process numerous varieties of sensor data, 
from LiDAR (light detection and ranging) to EO/
IR (electro-optical/infra-red) cameras to radar and 
beyond. Much of this work is currently focused 
on balancing a shared information landscape and 
operational picture with distributed processing, while 
also minimizing bandwidth and power requirements. 
Generative AI may play a role here. Recent research 
demonstrates that large language models (LLMs) 
may optimize simple collaborative navigation 
tasks much more efficiently than traditional deep 
reinforcement learning (DRL) approaches.138Daniel Dossenbach 
Scientific Advisor in Innovation, State Secretariat 
for Education, Research and Innovation Switzerland
Karen Hallberg 
Principal Researcher, Bariloche 
Atomic Center (CONICET)David Parekh 
Chief Executive Officer, SRI International
Develop cross-industry data standards – 
Establish common protocols for sensor 
data sharing, security and interoperability 
across industries to enable seamless integration of 
distributed sensing networks.Ecosystem readiness map
Boxed Icons
Modernize critical infrastructure – Upgrade 
telecommunications and connectivity 
infrastructure in key urban environments 
to support the bandwidth and reliability requirements 
of collaborative sensing systems.KEY ACTIONS TO ACHIEVE SCALE
TechnologicalSocial
Economic EnvironmentalPolicy
 Image: 
Collaborative sensing 
networks combine 
distributed sensors with 
AI to improve decision-
making, urban systems 
and autonomous 
technologies.
Credit: Midjourney 
and Studio Miko. 
Prompt (abbreviated): 
“LiDAR scan of buildings, 
cars, people and scenery.”
Read more: 
For more expert analysis, 
visit the collaborative 
sensing transformation 
map. Authored by: 
Mehrdad Dianati.
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Strategic outlook 
Collaborative sensing
By Dubai Future Foundation
Collaborative sensing could significantly reshape urban 
systems, mobility and societal infrastructure. Powered by 
vehicle-to-everything (V2X) technologies, 5G, AI and edge 
computing, this approach may create intelligent urban 
environments that perceive, respond and adapt to 
complex environmental dynamics with greater precision 
than current systems.
The potential impact of collaborative sensing extends 
beyond traditional traffic management, reshaping urban 
resilience, supply chains and emergency response 
capabilities. Cities could develop adaptive infrastructures 
that respond in real time to changing conditions, enabling 
more dynamic resource allocation during crises, optimized 
delivery routes for critical supplies and coordinated 
emergency vehicle deployment. With intelligent mobility 
systems forming the foundation of these capabilities, urban 
environments could serve citizens through seamlessly 
integrated technological systems.139
Among the most immediate and measurable outcomes 
and initial use case is improved safety. In transport, V2X 
technologies have demonstrated remarkable potential 
for accident prevention. Automated emergency braking 
systems showed 59% crash avoidance when only turning 
vehicles were equipped, increasing to 77% with full 
technology integration.140 Insurance research indicates up 
to 78% decrease in collisions for vehicles with intelligent 
sensing capabilities,141 signalling a potential shift in risk 
assessment and urban mobility.
Strategic benefits would also ripple across multiple 
industries. Transport and logistics could gain significantly, 
with truck platooning demonstrating a 5-10% fuel 
consumption reduction.142 Telecommunications 
infrastructure may undergo fundamental upgrades, with 5G improving location accuracy from over 1 metre to 
0.1 metres with 99.9% reliability,143,144 enabling potentially 
unprecedented levels of collective vehicle operation.
Yet, the transformative potential of collaborative sensing at 
scale is matched by complex challenges. With only 55% 
of the global population currently having 5G access,145 
expanding telecommunications infrastructure represents a 
critical prerequisite. Additional barriers include developing 
common data standards, establishing robust cybersecurity 
frameworks, creating comprehensive liability models and 
building public trust in collaborative technologies.
The most strategic organizations would view collaborative 
sensing as a potential platform for reimagining urban 
systems. Success will depend on collaboration across 
government, private sector and technological domains. 
The core challenge lies in moving beyond mere 
technological connection to creating adaptive urban 
environments that can learn, respond and evolve.
The next decade presents a critical window for 
developing collaborative sensing ecosystems. Nations 
and organizations that lead in establishing integrated 
data standards, investing in robust telecommunications 
infrastructure and designing interoperable sensing 
networks might shape a future where cities become more 
resilient, responsive and human-centred. As collaborative 
sensing shifts from isolated, single-use applications 
towards interconnected sensing networks, the potential 
for transforming urban systems extends beyond efficiency 
gains to a fundamental reimagining of how cities could 
function, adapt and evolve.
 Related DFF megatrends: Technological Vulnerabilities 
and Digital Realities146
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Generative watermarking
Enhancing trust with invisible, 
immutable markers.10
Generative AI watermarking technologies embed 
invisible markers in AI-generated content – including 
text, images, audio and video – to verify authenticity 
and help trace content origins. As AI-generated 
content becomes increasingly hard to differentiate 
from that created without AI, there has been a 
surge in innovative watermarking technologies147 
designed to help combat misinformation, protect 
intellectual property, counter academic dishonesty 
and promote trust in digital content.
Watermarking techniques aim to subtly alter 
generative AI outputs without noticeably impacting 
their quality. Text-based watermark technologies, 
such as Google DeepMind’s SynthID technology,148 
take advantage of the fact that there are thousands 
of words in a given language that can be randomly 
substituted by others. They work by including a 
narrow and specific subset of such words throughout 
AI-generated text that seems natural but is distinct 
from the more random word choices a human 
writer might make. This results in an AI-specific 
textual “fingerprint”. Image and video watermark 
technologies include introducing imperceptible 
changes at the pixel level that can survive edits 
like resizing and compression – for instance by 
subtly altering the values of individual pixels so that 
a machine can see the changes, but the human 
eye cannot, or embedding hidden patterns149 in 
generated output that only a machine can extract. 
Watermarking AI-generated content gained traction 
in 2022, as models like ChatGPT and Stable 
Diffusion gained popularity and widespread use. 
By 2023, major AI companies, including OpenAI, 
Google and Meta, committed to watermarking under 
regulatory pressure.150 A breakthrough came in 2024 
when Google DeepMind open-sourced SynthID. 
Simultaneously, Meta introduced VideoSeal,151 a 
watermarking system for AI-generated videos.
Leading AI companies are now increasingly 
integrating watermarking into their platforms. 
Google, for instance, is embedding SynthID into 
AI-generated images, text and videos across its 
services. Meta is applying invisible watermarks 
and metadata tags152 to AI-generated content on 
Facebook, Instagram and Threads. AI companies 
are partnering with organizations like Partnership on 
AI153 to ensure “synthetic media transparency”. 
Despite progress, though, widespread use of 
AI watermarking faces challenges.154 Simple 
modifications to AI-generated outputs can still 
disrupt detection. Users can attempt to remove or 
forge watermarks, either by cropping images and 
video where watermarks are embedded in a specific 
location, or by adjusting text (and even using AI-
based watermark removers). Uneven adoption also 
presents risks where, without universal industry 
standards, inconsistent implementation may weaken effectiveness. There are also substantial 
ethical concerns around misuse, such as falsely 
labelling real content as AI-generated or false 
positives, where erroneous accusations of covertly 
using AI can have unintended consequences, 
especially in cases related to academic integrity. 
To be successful, these technologies will need to be 
accompanied by equally sophisticated governance 
and use guidelines. China has acted to regulate 
generated content to require watermarking,155 and 
other regions, such as the EU,156 are also developing 
responses to manage the security and authenticity of 
digital content. The Coalition for Content Provenance 
and Authenticity (C2PA), a coalition of leading media 
generators in the AI space, is also leading the 
development of technical standards for certifying 
the source of media content; an approach that 
regulators would struggle to meaningfully produce. 
Watermarking has proven a fertile area for start-ups 
globally with different technological approaches. 
Emerging generative AI watermarking technologies 
are becoming a cornerstone of responsible AI 
deployment as they help balance innovation with 
accountability. While no single method is foolproof, 
industry-wide adoption and regulatory alignment 
will help determine the technology’s long-term utility 
and success of AI-generated content.Katherine Daniell 
Director and Professor, School of Cybernetics, 
Australian National UniversityAndrew Maynard 
Professor, School for the Future of Innovation 
in Society, Arizona State University
Boxed Icons
Develop tamper-resistant watermarking 
standards – Invest in advanced 
watermarking technologies that can 
withstand removal attempts and establish 
industry-wide standards for their implementation. Ecosystem readiness map
KEY ACTIONS TO ACHIEVE SCALE
TechnologicalSocial
EconomicEnvironmentalPolicy
 Image: 
Generative watermarking 
embeds invisible 
markers in content to 
verify authenticity, trace 
origins and promote 
accountability.
Credit: Midjourney 
and Studio Miko. 
Prompt (abbreviated): 
“Digital fingerprint 
constructed from 
glowing binary code.”
Read more: 
For more expert 
analysis, visit the 
generative watermarking 
transformation map. 
Authored by: Sri Krishnan.Boxed Icons
Create cross-platform verification systems 
– Build independent verification systems that 
can detect and authenticate watermarks 
across different platforms and content types.
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Strategic outlook 
Generative watermarking
By Dubai Future Foundation
Over the next decade, generative watermarking technologies 
could evolve from optional technical safeguards to important 
components of digital trust infrastructure. As synthetic 
content becomes increasingly prevalent, embedded 
watermarks might form the foundation of a global 
verification ecosystem that helps distinguish between 
human and machine-created digital assets.
The media and creative industries may experience 
significant transformation. The converging regulatory 
frameworks across California,157 China158 and the European 
Union159 – with penalties reaching up to $38 million or 7% of 
annual turnover160 – suggest an emerging global interest in 
content provenance systems. Major platforms have already 
begun positioning themselves in this space, with Adobe’s 
content credentials,161 TikTok’s AI labelling standards162 and 
Google’s SynthID representing early attempts to establish 
market-defining protocols. 
This signals something more than a compliance challenge. 
It marks the early stages of a comprehensive governance 
system for digital content that will create distinct competitive 
advantages for early adopters while potentially marginalizing 
non-compliant creators and platforms. Nations and 
organizations that take the lead in setting watermarking 
standards will shape the rules of the emerging synthetic 
media economy.
The implications could extend beyond creative sectors 
to potentially reshape legal and financial systems. 
Courts might eventually accept watermarked content 
as evidence in intellectual property (IP) disputes and 
defamation cases, while insurance companies could 
consider developing tiered coverage models based on content authentication levels. For creators, the ability to 
verify their work – whether human-made or AI-assisted – 
may position them to command premium prices in markets 
increasingly populated with synthetic alternatives. 
Technical challenges remain significant but potentially 
addressable. Currently, watermarking systems are being 
implemented, but techniques to remove generative 
watermarks remain, highlighting the gap between existing 
capabilities and the need for tamper-resistant, cross-
format watermarks that accurately identify 100% of 
AI-generated content.163 The integration with blockchain 
systems to create verifiable watermarks164 represents a 
promising frontier that could establish better content identity 
regardless of modification or distribution.
Organizations might prepare strategically by investing in 
interoperable standards rather than proprietary systems. 
Those developing more sophisticated watermarking 
techniques, particularly those resistant to removal and 
compatible with emerging content formats, could establish 
leadership in the evolving digital authentication ecosystem. 
Nations and organizations that take the lead in setting 
watermarking standards may influence the development of 
the emerging synthetic media economy.
Looking ahead, generative watermarking represents not just 
another tool for content verification, but a potential reimagining 
of how trust is established in an increasingly synthetic digital 
landscape. Progress would depend on collaboration across 
technology, policy and creative sectors to create systems 
that balance innovation with appropriate safeguards.
 Related DFF megatrends: Technological Vulnerabilities 
and Future Humanity165
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
From weak signals to 
societal transformation
For over a decade, the World Economic Forum’s 
Top 10 Emerging Technologies report has served 
as a unique lens for understanding technological 
transformation – tracking how early-stage 
technologies evolve from tentative signals to 
transformative solutions. Consider CRISPR-Cas9, first 
highlighted in the 2015 report as a promising gene-
editing technique. What seemed then like a theoretical 
breakthrough has since revolutionized multiple 
domains, from enabling precise vaccine development 
during the COVID-19 pandemic to facilitating 
groundbreaking xenotransplantation in 2024.
This trajectory illustrates the core methodology: 
identifying technologies not for their immediate 
application, but for their potential to create systemic 
change. The most profound innovations emerge not 
in isolation, but through intricate convergences – 
where synthetic biology meets AI, materials science 
intersects with energy systems and biotechnology 
converges with digital technologies.
Each technology tracked represents more than a 
standalone solution; they are signals of broader 
transformations, capable of redesigning entire 
systems. Green nitrogen fixation reimagines 
agricultural supply chains, structural battery 
composites transform understanding of material functionality and autonomous biochemical sensing 
creates entirely new paradigms for health monitoring.
This annual review reveals consistent patterns in 
technological maturation. Breakthrough innovations 
require more than technical brilliance – they demand 
comprehensive ecosystem development. This 
means navigating complex interactions between 
social acceptance, technological capability, 
environmental sustainability, economic viability 
and regulatory frameworks.
Looking back, the report has consistently 
demonstrated its predictive power: identifying CRISPR 
in 2015, anticipating mRNA vaccine platforms in 
2017, exploring AI in drug discovery in 2020 and 
now examining engineered living therapeutics. 
These are not mere technological snapshots, but 
waypoints in an ongoing journey of innovation.
As the report continues to track emerging 
technologies, the goal remains unchanged: to 
provide a forward-looking perspective that bridges 
scientific potential with practical implementation. 
The most profound innovations are rarely obvious 
at first glance. They emerge through persistent 
observation, interdisciplinary collaboration and a 
fundamental willingness to reimagine what’s possible.
Scaling innovation: how emerging technologies become tomorrow’s foundations FIGURE 3
CRISPr-CAS9
Highlighted/uni00A0in Top 10 
Emerging Technologies 
of 2015
mRNA vaccines
Highlighted/uni00A0in Top 10 
Emerging Technologies 
of 2017AI-led molecular design
Highlighted/uni00A0in Top 10 
Emerging Technologies 
of 2018Engineered living 
therapeutics
Highlighted/uni00A0in Top 10 
Emerging Technologies 
of 2025
Technologies featured in the Top 10 Emerging Technologies reports, 
demonstrate how breakthrough technologies build upon foundational 
innovations, creating disruptions and redesigns of entire societal ecosystems.
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Contributors
World Economic Forum 
Kimmy Bettinger
Lead, Expert and Knowledge Communities 
Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution
Sebastian Buckup
Managing Director, Centre for Nature and Climate
Jeremy Jurgens
Managing Director, Centre for the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution
Meredith McCleary
Specialist, Strategic Impact, Centre for 
the Fourth Industrial Revolution
Strategic Intelligence Platform
Bryonie Guthrie
Lead, Foresight and Organizational Transformation
Stephan Mergenthaler
Chief Technology Officer
Minji Sung
Specialist, Content and Partnerships
Astrid Wang
Specialist, Foresight and Organizational 
Transformation
Frontiers
Susan Debad
Consultant
Toby Dore
Manager, Advanced Analytics
Frederick Fenter
Chief Executive Editor
Anna Ondicova
Specialist, Public Affairs
George Thomas
Lead, Strategic Partnerships
Participating journals:
Frontiers in Biotechnology and Bioengineering 
Frontiers in Chemical Engineering 
Frontiers in Chemistry 
Frontiers in Endocrinology 
Frontiers in Energy Research 
Frontiers in Future Transportation 
Frontiers in Manufacturing Technology Frontiers in Nuclear Engineering 
Frontiers in Sensors 
Frontiers in Signal Processing
Dubai Future Foundation
Fatma Abulhoul
Head, Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution 
United Arab Emirates
Khalfan Belhoul
Chief Executive Officer
Heba Chehade
Head, Foresight Research
Saeed Al Falasi
Director, Dubai Centre of Artificial Intelligence
Abdulaziz Al Jaziri
Deputy Chief Executive Officer and Chief 
Operations Officer
Aruba Khalid
Associate Project Manager, Research
Dhari Al Mawad
Director, Strategy
Yahya Mohammed
Robotics Research Engineer, Dubai Future Labs
Patrick Noack
Executive Director, Dubai Future Institute
Mohamed Qasem
Dean, Dubai Future Academy
Tarek Taha
Director, Robotics Labs, Dubai Future Labs
Biying Zhang
Senior Strategy and Policy Manager, Sandbox Dubai
Production
Rose Chilvers
Designer, Studio Miko
Laurence Denmark
Creative Director, Studio Miko
Martha Howlett
Lead Editor, Studio Miko
Oliver Turner
Designer, Studio Miko
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Acknowledgements
Steering Committee
Co-Chairs
Mariette DiChristina
Dean and Professor, Practice in Journalism, 
Boston University College of Communication
Barnard S. Meyerson
Chief Innovation Officer Emeritus, IBM
Members
Doug Arent
Executive Director, National Renewable Energy 
Laboratory Foundation
Katherine Daniell
Director and Professor, School of Cybernetics, 
Australian National University
Daniel Dossenbach
Scientific Advisor in Innovation, State Secretariat 
for Education, Research and Innovation (SERI) 
of Switzerland
Frederick Fenter
Chief Executive Editor, Frontiers
Olga Fink
Professor, Intelligent Maintenance and Operations 
Systems, EPFL (École Polytechnique Fédérale 
de Lausanne)
Javier Garcia-Martinez
Professor, Director of the Molecular 
Nanotechnology Lab, University of Alicante
Karen Hallberg
Principal Researcher, Bariloche Atomic Center 
(CONICET)
Thomas Hartung
Professor, Doerenkamp Zbinden Chair for 
Evidence-based Toxicology, Johns Hopkins 
Bloomberg School of Public Health 
Krishna Kumar
Chief Executive Officer, Cropin Sage
Sang-Yup Lee
Senior Vice-President, Research; Distinguished 
Professor, Korea Advanced Institute of Science 
and Technology (KAIST)
Alison Lewis
Dean of the Faculty of Engineering and the Built 
Environment, University of Cape TownAndrew Maynard
Professor, School for the Future of Innovation 
in Society, Arizona State University
David Parekh
Chief Executive Officer, SRI International
Nayat Sanchez-Pi
Chief Executive Officer, Inria Chile
Wilfried Weber
Scientific Director and Professor for New Materials, 
Leibniz Institute for New Materials
World Economic Forum
Maria Alonso
Lead, Autonomous Systems, Centre for the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution
Rachel Dooley
Lead, Strategic Communications, 
Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution
Manju George
Head, Strategic Impact and Integration, 
Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution
Alfredo Giron
Head, Ocean and Nature Positive, Centre for Nature 
and Climate
Sarah Kanwar
Project Fellow (Accenture), Centre for Energy 
and Materials
Jitka Kolarova
Lead, Health and Healthcare Innovation, 
Centre for Health and Healthcare
Benjamin Larsen
Lead, Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning, 
Centre for AI Excellence
Michelle Mormont
Lead, Innovator Communities, Centre for the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution
Kristen Panerali
Head, Clean Power and Electrification, 
Centre for Energy and Materials
Arunima Sarkar
Head, Frontier Technologies, Centre for the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution
Brynne Stanton
Lead, Bioeconomy, Centre for the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Other acknowledgements
Leif Erik Asp
Professor, Chalmers University of Technology
Odne Burheim
Professor, Norwegian University of Science 
and Technology
Alfredo Caro
Research Professor, George Washington University
Shirley Dent
Head, Public Relations, Frontiers
Dermont Diamond
Professor Emeritus, Dublin City University
Mehrdad Dianati
Professor, University of Warwick
Sergei Dudarev
Senior Fellow, United Kingdom Atomic 
Energy Authority
Jean Marie François
Professor, Institut Biotechnologique 
de Toulouse (INSA)
Jeff M.P . Holley
Professor, University of BristolSri Krishnan
Professor, Toronto Metropolitan University
Stephan Kuster
Director, External Affairs, Frontiers
Björn Johansson
Professor, Chalmers University of Technology 
Hailong Li
Professor, Central South University
Kaitlyn Schmidt
Senior Public Relations Specialist, Frontiers
Sanjay Singh
Scientist, National Institute of Animal Biotechnology
Wenxi Tian
Professor, Xi’an Jiaotong University 
Johanna Xu
Assistant Professor, Chalmers University 
of Technology
Zequn Yang
Associate Professor, Central South University
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
Endnotes
1. Imperial College London. (n.d.). Structural batteries. https://www.imperial.ac.uk/structural-power-composites/structural-batteries/. 
2. Hopkins, B. J., Long, J. W., Rolison, D. R., & Parker, J. F. (2020). High-performance structural batteries. Joule, 4(11), 
pp. 2240-2243. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2020.07.027. 
3. Physics World. (n.d.). Structural Battery is world’s strongest, say researchers – physics world. https://physicsworld.com/a/
structural-battery-is-worlds-strongest-say-researchers/. 
4. Credence Research. (2024, 28 September). Structural Battery Market Size, growth and forecast 2032. 
https://www.credenceresearch.com/report/structural-battery-market. 
5. Jin, T., Singer, G., Liang, K., & Yang, Y. (2023). Structural batteries: Advances, challenges and perspectives. 
Materials Today, 62, pp. 151-167. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mattod.2022.12.001. 
6. International Energy Agency (IEA). (2024). Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024. https://www.iea.org/reports/global-
critical-minerals-outlook-2024. 
7. Energy.gov. (n.d.). Materials technologies. https://www.energy.gov/eere/vehicles/materials-technologies. 
8. Nie, B., Lim, J., Liu, T., Kovalenko, I., et al. (2023). Multifunctional composite designs for structural energy storage. 
Battery Energy, 2(6). https://doi.org/10.1002/bte2.20230023. 
9. Karadotcheva, E., Nguyen, S.N., Greenhalgh, E.S., Shaffer, M.S., et al. (2021). Structural Power Performance Targets 
for future electric aircraft. Energies, 14(19), 6006. https://doi.org/10.3390/en14196006. 
10. Fairs, M. (n.d.). Could carbon fibres soon become free of fossil fuels?. World Economic Forum. https://www.weforum.org/
stories/2021/07/scientists-bio-based-carbon-fibres/. 
11. Ziemińska-Stolarska, A., Sobulska, M., Pietrzak, M., & Zbiciński, I. (2024). A review of end-of-life scenarios 
for fibre-reinforced polymer materials. Energies, 17(15), 3713. https://doi.org/10.3390/en17153713. 
12. Ibid.
13. Dubai Future Foundation (DFF). (2024, 11 February). Navigating 10 megatrends shaping our future in 2024. 
https://www.dubaifuture.ae/navigating-10-megatrends-shaping-our-future-in-2024. 
14. Loeb S. & Norman R.S. (1975). Osmotic power plants. Science, 189(4203), pp.654-5.
15. Aghapour Aktij S., Dadashi Firouzjaei M., Pilevar M., Asad A., et al. (2025). Enhancing sustainable energy production 
through co-polyamide membranes for improved pressure-retarded osmosis performance and environmental impact: 
synthesis and life cycle analysis. Green Chemistry, 27(3), pp. 586-606.
16. Ibid.
17. Paşaoğlu M.E., Koyuncu İ. (2021). Tubular PAN/CNC Thin Film Nanocomposite (TFN) Pressure Retarded Osmosis (PRO) 
Membrane: Fabrication and Preliminary Evaluation in Desalination Process. Cellulose, 28(13), pp. 8653-70.
18. Kim C., Lee J., Schmucker D., Fortner J.D. (2020). Highly Stable Superparamagnetic Iron Oxide Nanoparticles 
as Functional Draw Solutes for Osmotically Driven Water Transport. NPJ Clean Water, 3(1).
19. Gül T.F., Akalın M., Dönmezler E.N., Bolat A., et al. (2024). Review on reverse electrodialysis process-a pioneering 
technology for energy generation by salinity gradient. Frontiers in Membrane Science and Technology, 3.
20. SaltPower. (2025). What is SaltPower. https://saltpower.net/what-is-saltpower/.
21. Kurihara M., Hanakawa M. (2013). Mega-ton Water System: Japanese national research and development project on 
seawater desalination and wastewater reclamation. Desalination, 308, pp. 131-7.
22. Hitachi News Release. (2015). Hitachi and Toray to Test “Mega-ton Water System,” a Large-scale, High Efficiency Seawater 
Desalination System, in Saudi Arabia [Press release]. https://www.hitachi.com/New/cnews/month/2015/05/150520a.html.
23. Cagney, D., & Gruet, R. (2019). Powering Homes Today, Powering Nations Tomorrow. Ocean Energy Europe. 
https://www.oceanenergy-europe.eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/ETIP-Ocean-Integrated-Strategy-2019-LR.pdf. 
24. International Energy Agency (IEA). (2025). Supply – Electricity 2025 – Analysis. 
https://www.iea.org/reports/electricity-2025/supply. 
25. Hassan, Q., Algburi, S., Sameen, A.Z., Salman, H.M., & Jaszczur, M. (2023). A review of hybrid renewable energy 
systems: Solar and wind-powered solutions: Challenges, opportunities, and policy implications. Results in Engineering, 
20, 101621. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rineng.2023.101621. 
26. International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA). (2020). Innovation outlook: Ocean energy technologies.
27. SCISPACE. (n.d.). Osmotic Power: Papers published on a yearly basis. https://typeset.io/topics/osmotic-power-2esx4hak/2023. 
28. Sweetch Energy. (2023, 18 December). Sweetch Energy secures €25M to accelerate the global deployment of osmotic 
energy. https://cdn.prod.website-files.com/6527b5a78159fe64a0eb7cdf/658048131232d2d65a376e14_121823%20
PR%20SWEETCH%20ENERGY.pdf. 
29. Hedin, J.T.L., Meli, F., & Narasimhan, K. (2023, 6 April). Method of using nanofiltration and reverse osmosis to remove 
chemical contaminants. Google Patents. https://patents.google.com/patent/US20230109082A1/en. 
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
30. Feria-Díaz, J.J., Correa-Mahecha, F., López-Méndez, M.C., Rodríguez-Miranda, J.P ., & Barrera-Rojas, J. (2021). 
Recent desalination technologies by hybridization and integration with reverse osmosis: A Review. Water, 13(10), 1369. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/w13101369. 
31. Dubai Future Foundation (DFF). (2024, 11 February). Navigating 10 megatrends shaping our future in 2024. 
https://www.dubaifuture.ae/navigating-10-megatrends-shaping-our-future-in-2024. 
32. Liou, J. (2023, 14 September). What are small modular reactors (SMRs)?. International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). 
https://www.iaea.org/newscenter/news/what-are-small-modular-reactors-smrs. 
33. Energy.gov. (2022, 23 August). X-energy completes $40 million project to further develop high-temperature gas reactor. 
https://www.energy.gov/ne/articles/x-energy-completes-40-million-project-further-develop-high-temperature-gas-
reactor#:~:text=X-energy%20received%20the%20Advanced,%20and%20TRISO-X%20particle%20fuel%20. 
34. Martucci, B. (2024, 13 May). Small modular reactor startups Oklo and Nano Nuclear Energy Make Us Stock Market 
debut. Utility Dive. https://www.utilitydive.com/news/small-modular-reactor-startups-oklo-nano-nuclear-energy-haleu-
fuel/715911/. 
35. World Nuclear Association. (2024, 3 May). Nuclear Power in South Korea. https://world-nuclear.org/information-library/
country-profiles/countries-o-s/south-korea. 
36. World Nuclear Association. (2024, 5 September). Nuclear Power in the United Arab Emirates. 
https://world-nuclear.org/information-library/country-profiles/countries-t-z/united-arab-emirates. 
37. Westinghouse Nuclear. (n.d.). Westinghouse celebrates Milestone Achievement as AP1000® Technology powers plant 
vogtle unit 4 into Commercial Operation. https://info.westinghousenuclear.com/news/westinghouse-celebrates-milestone-
achievement-as-ap1000-technology-powers-plant-vogtle-unit-4-into-commercial-operation. 
38. Paul, S., Klimenka, M., Duarte, F., Crawford, C., et al. (2024). When Cities Go Nuclear: Exploring the applications of 
nuclear batteries toward Energy Transformation. Urban Science, 8(4), 226. https://doi.org/10.3390/urbansci8040226. 
39. Platonova, M. (2024, 14 February). Decarbonizing steel production with nuclear hydrogen. International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA). https://www.iaea.org/bulletin/decarbonizing-steel-production-with-nuclear-hydrogen. 
40. Apel, F., Hoyt, J., Marques, F., Reiter, S. & Schulze, P . (2023, 6 October). Cementing your lead: The cement industry in 
the net-zero transition. McKinsey & Company. https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/engineering-construction-and-
buildingmaterials/our-insights/cementing-your-lead-the-cement-industry-in-the-net-zero-transition. 
41. Fraser, P ., Wanner, B., Everhart, K. & Herzog, A. (2022). Nuclear Power and Secure Energy Transitions: 
From today’s challenges to tomorrow’s clean energy systems. International Energy Agency (IEA).
42. Hanna, B.N., Abou-Jaoude, A., Guaita, N., Talbot, P . & Lohse, C. (2024). Navigating economies of scale and multiples 
for nuclear-powered data centers and other applications with high service availability needs. Energies, 17(20), 5073. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/en17205073. 
43. Fisher, M. (2024, 13 December). Accelerating advanced nuclear deployment: Meeting the Supply Chain Challenge. 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). https://www.iaea.org/newscenter/news/accelerating-advanced-nuclear-
deployment-meeting-the-supply-chain-challenge. 
44. International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). (2024). Small Modular Reactors: Advances in SMR Developments 2024. 
https://doi.org/10.61092/iaea.3o4h-svum. 
45. Dubai Future Foundation (DFF). (2024, 11 February). Navigating 10 megatrends shaping our future in 2024. 
https://www.dubaifuture.ae/navigating-10-megatrends-shaping-our-future-in-2024. 
46. Cubillos-Ruiz, A., Guo, T., Sokolovska, A., Miller, P . F., et al. (2021). Engineering living therapeutics with synthetic biology. 
Nature Reviews Drug Discovery, 20, pp. 941-960. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1038/s41573-021-00285-3. 
47. Khazem, A., Schmachtenberg, R., Weiand, A., Sankaran, S., & Weber, W. (2025). Engineered microbial 
living matter for diagnostics, prevention, and therapy. Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 92, 103269. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2025.103269. 
48. Chariot Biosciences. (n.d.). Innovative Therapeutics Pipeline. https://www.chariot-bio.com/pipeline/. 
49. Aurealis Therapeutics. (2024, 25 November). Pipeline and science. https://aurealistherapeutics.com/pipeline-and-
science/#pipeline. 
50. NEC. (2024, 12 December). NEC Announces Interim Results from Phase 1 Clinical Trial of NECVAX-NEO1, 
an AI-Driven Personalized Oral Cancer Vaccine, at ESMO Immuno-Oncology Congress 2024 [Press release]. 
https://www.nec.com/en/press/202412/global_20241212_01.html. 
51. Zalatan, J.G., Petrini, L., & Geiger, R. (2024). Engineering bacteria for cancer immunotherapy. Current Opinion 
in Biotechnology, 85, 103061. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2023.103061. 
52. Dey, S., & Sankaran, S. (2024). Engineered bacterial therapeutics with material solutions. Trends in Biotechnology, 42(12), 
pp. 1663-1676. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2024.06.011. 
53. Zou, Z.-P ., Zhang, X.-P ., Zhang, Q., Yin, B.-C., et al. (2024). Genetically engineered bacteria 
as inflammatory bowel disease therapeutics. Engineering Microbiology, 4(4), 100167. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engmic.2024.100167. 
54. Dubai Future Foundation (DFF). (2024, 11 February). Navigating 10 megatrends shaping our future in 2024. 
https://www.dubaifuture.ae/navigating-10-megatrends-shaping-our-future-in-2024. 
55. Kalinderi, K., Papaliagkas, V., & Fidani, L. (2024). GLP-1 receptor agonists: A new treatment in parkinson’s disease. 
International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 25(7), 3812. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25073812. 
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
56. Fessel, J. (2024). All GLP-1 agonists should, theoretically, cure alzheimer’s dementia but dulaglutide might be more 
effective than the others. Journal of Clinical Medicine, 13(13), 3729. https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13133729. 
57. Monti, G., Gomes Moreira, D., Richner, M., Mutsaers, H.A.M. (2022). GLP-1 Receptor Agonists in Neurodegeneration: 
Neurovascular Unit in the Spotlight. Cells, 11(13):2023. doi: 10.3390/cells11132023. 
58. Novo Nordisk. (2024). Semaglutide in early Alzheimer’s: EVOKE and EVOKE+ clinical trials. 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT04777396. 
59. BioSpace. (2024, 20 November). GLP-1 Receptor Agonist Market worth $55.70 Billion by 2031, Coherent Market Insights 
[Press release].https://www.biospace.com/press-releases/glp-1-receptor-agonist-market-worth-55-70-billion-by-2031-
coherent-market-insights. 
60. Kopp, K.O., Glotfelty, E.J., Li, Y., & Greig, N.H. (2022). Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists 
and neuroinflammation: Implications for neurodegenerative disease treatment. Pharmacological Research, 
186, 106550. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phrs.2022.106550.
61. Pyka, P ., Garbo, S., Fioravanti, R., Jacob, C., et al. (2024). Selenium-containing compounds: A new hope for 
innovative treatments in alzheimer’s disease and parkinson’s disease. Drug Discovery Today, 29(8), 104062. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drudis.2024.104062. 
62. Lobo, A. (2024, 17 September). In parkinson’s disease, healthcare expenses among largest part of cost. Parkinson’s 
News Today. https://parkinsonsnewstoday.com/news/parkinsons-disease-healthcare-expenses-largest-part-cost/. 
63. Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research. (2024, 8 November). Alzheimer’s disease. 
https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/alzheimers-disease/symptoms-causes/syc-20350447. 
64. U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). (2025, 5 March). FDA clarifies policies for compounders as national GLP-1 
supply begins to stabailize [Press release]. https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/fda-clarifies-policies-
compounders-national-glp-1-supply-begins-stabilize. 
65. Don Tracy, A.E. (2024, 25 June). Novo Nordisk to invest $4.1 billion in expanding manufacturing capabilities in the United 
States. PharmExec. https://www.pharmexec.com/view/novo-nordisk-invest-4-1-billion-expanding-manufacturing-
capabilities-united-states. 
66. Klein, H.E. (2024, 16 May). Most insured adults still have to pay at least part of the cost of GLP-1 drugs. AJMC. 
https://www.ajmc.com/view/most-insured-adults-still-have-to-pay-at-least-part-of-the-cost-of-glp-1-drugs. 
67. National Conference of State Legislature. (n.d.). Growth, volume, price: The skinny on GLP-1 medications - national 
conference of state legislatures. https://www.ncsl.org/state-legislatures-news/details/growth-volume-price-the-skinny-on-
glp-1-medications. 
68. Azam, S., Haque, Md. E., Balakrishnan, R., Kim, I.-S., & Choi, D.-K. (2021). The ageing brain: Molecular and cellular 
basis of neurodegeneration. Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology, 9. https://doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2021.683459. 
69. Meissner, W.G., Remy, P ., Giordana, C., Maltête, et al. (2024). Trial of lixisenatide in early parkinson’s disease. 
New England Journal of Medicine, 390(13), pp. 1176-1185. https://doi.org/10.1056/nejmoa2312323. 
70. BioSpace. (2024, 9 December). Evidence mounts for potential of glp-1s in alzheimer’s disease. 
https://www.biospace.com/drug-development/evidence-mounts-for-potential-of-glp-1s-in-alzheimers-disease. 
71. Dubai Future Foundation (DFF). (2024, 11 February) Navigating 10 megatrends shaping our future in 2024. 
https://www.dubaifuture.ae/navigating-10-megatrends-shaping-our-future-in-2024. 
72. Maity, D., Guha Ray, P ., Buchmann, P ., Mansouri, M., & Fussenegger, M. (2023). Blood-glucose-powered metabolic fuel 
cell for self-sufficient bioelectronics. Advanced Materials, 35(21). https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202300890. 
73. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK). (2024, 28 December). Continuous glucose monitoring. 
https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/diabetes/overview/managing-diabetes/continuous-glucose-monitoring. 
74. Zargartalebi, H., Mirzaie, S., GhavamiNejad, A., Ahmed, S. U., et al. (2024). Active-reset protein sensors enable continuous 
in vivo monitoring of inflammation. Science, 386(6726), pp. 1146-1153. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.adn2600. 
75. Florea, L., & Diamond, D. (2022). Sensors and “The internet of biochemical things”. Frontiers in Sensors, 3. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fsens.2022.1010212. 
76. Huang, C.-W., Lin, C., Nguyen, M.K., Hussain, A., et al. (2023). A review of Biosensor for environmental monitoring: 
Principle, application, and corresponding achievement of Sustainable Development Goals. Bioengineered, 14(1), 
pp. 58-80. https://doi.org/10.1080/21655979.2022.2095089. 
77. Albu, C., Chira, A., Radu, G.-L., & Eremia, S.A. (2025). Advances in cost-effective chemosensors for sustainable 
monitoring in food safety and processing. Chemosensors, 13(3), 113. https://doi.org/10.3390/chemosensors13030113. 
78. Institute of Medicine and National Research Council Committee to Ensure Safe Food from Production to Consumption. 
(1998). The Changing Nature of Food Hazards: Cause for Increasing Concern in Ensuring Safe Food: From Production to 
Consumption. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK209107/. 
79. Lino, C., Barrias, S., Chaves, R., Adega, F. et al. (2022). Biosensors as diagnostic tools in clinical applications. Biochimica 
et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Reviews on Cancer, 1877(3), 188726. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbcan.2022.188726. 
80. Florea, L., & Diamond, D. (2022). Sensors and “The internet of biochemical things”. Frontiers in Sensors, 3. 
 https://doi.org/10.3389/fsens.2022.1010212.
81. Essington, E. A., Vezeau, G. E., Cetnar, D. P ., Grandinette, E. (2024). An autonomous microbial sensor 
enables long-term detection of TNT explosive in natural soil. Nature Communications, 15, 10471. 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617249. 
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
82. Ibid.
83. Florea, L., & Diamond, D. (2022). Sensors and “The internet of biochemical things”. Frontiers in Sensors, 3. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fsens.2022.1010212.
84. Ibid.
85. Dubai Future Foundation (DFF). (2024, 11 February). Navigating 10 megatrends shaping our future in 2024. 
https://www.dubaifuture.ae/navigating-10-megatrends-shaping-our-future-in-2024. 
86. Krietsch Boerner, L. (2019, 15 November). Industrial Ammonia production emits more CO2 than any other chemical-making 
reaction. chemists want to change that. Chemical & Engineering News. https://cen.acs.org/environment/green-chemistry/
Industrial-ammonia-production-emits-CO2/97/i24. 
87. Lehigh University. (2018, 9 July). Electrochemically-produced ammonia could revolutionize food production. Phys.org. 
https://phys.org/news/2018-07-electrochemically-produced-ammonia-revolutionize-food-production.html. 
88. Ahmed, M. I., Assafiri, A., Hibbert, D. B., & Zhao, C. (2023). Li-mediated electrochemical nitrogen fixation: 
Key advances and future perspectives. Small, 19(52). https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.202305616. 
89. Koh, S., Choi, Y., Lee, I., Kim, G.-M. et al. (2022). Light-driven ammonia production by azotobacter vinelandii 
cultured in medium containing colloidal quantum dots. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 144(24), 
pp. 10798-10808. https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.2c01886. 
90. Jiang, Y., Chen, C.-J., Li, K., Cui, L.-P ., & Chen, J.-J. (2025). Polyoxometalates for the catalytic reduction of nitrogen 
oxide and its derivatives: From novel structures to functional applications. Chemical Communications, 61(26), 
pp. 4881-4896. https://doi.org/10.1039/d5cc00632e. 
91. Ahmed, M. I., Assafiri, A., Hibbert, D. B., & Zhao, C. (2023). Li-mediated electrochemical nitrogen fixation: 
Key advances and future perspectives. Small, 19(52). https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.202305616. 
92. Tonelli, D., Rosa, L., Gabrielli, P ., Parente, A., & Contino, F. (2024). Cost-competitive decentralized ammonia fertilizer 
production can increase food security. Nature Food, 5(6), pp. 469-479. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-024-00979-y. 
93. Gallucci, M. (2021). The ammonia solution: Ammonia engines and fuel cells in cargo ships could slash 
their carbon emissions. IEEE Spectrum, 58(3), pp. 44-50. https://doi.org/10.1109/mspec.2021.9370109. 
94. Ibid.
95. Izelaar, B., Ramdin, M., Vlierboom, A., Perez-Fortes, M. et al. (2024). Techno-economic assessment of 
different smallscale electrochemical NH3 production plants. Energy & Environmental Science, 17, 7983. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1039/d4ee03299c. 
96. Blain, L. (2022, 30 November). World’s largest green ammonia projects could clean up half the market. New Atlas. 
https://newatlas.com/energy/largest-green-ammonia-projects/. 
97. World Economic Forum. (2023). Ammonia Industry. In Net-Zero Industry Tracker 2023. https://www.weforum.org/
publications/net-zero-industry-tracker-2023/ammonia-industry-eaee0d0381/. 
98. Lehigh University. (2018, July 9). Electrochemically-produced ammonia could revolutionize food production. Phys.org. 
https://phys.org/news/2018-07-electrochemically-produced-ammonia-revolutionize-food-production.html. 
99. International Energy Agency (IEA). (2021). Executive summary. In Ammonia Technology Roadmap. 
https://www.iea.org/reports/ammonia-technology-roadmap/executive-summary. 
100. Hussain, J., Mubarak, M., Boopathi, D., & Jayabal, R. (2025). A comprehensive review of production and utilisation of 
ammonia as potential fuel for compression ignition engines. Next Sustainability, 5, 100116. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nxsust.2025.100116. 
101. Adeniyi, A., Bello, I., Mukaila, T., Sarker, N., & Hammed, A. (2023). Trends in biological ammonia production. 
Trends in Biological Ammonia Production, 12(2), 41. https://doi.org/10.20944/preprints202304.0543.v1. 
102. Ibid.
103. Spry, M., Westhead, O., Tort, R., Moss, B., et al. (2023). Water increases the faradaic selectivity of Li-mediated nitrogen 
reduction. ACS Energy Letters, 8(2), pp. 1230-1235. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsenergylett.2c02792. 
104. Fu, X. (2023). Lithium-mediated nitrogen reduction for electrochemical ammonia synthesis: From batch to flow reactor. 
Materials Today Catalysis, 3, 100031. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtcata.2023.100031. 
105. Zhou, Y., Fu, X., Chorkendorff, I., & Nørskov, J. K. (2024). Electrochemical Ammonia Synthesis: The energy efficiency 
challenge. ACS Energy Letters, 10(1), pp. 128-132. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsenergylett.4c02954. 
106. International Energy Agency (IEA). (n.d.). Critical Minerals. https://www.iea.org/topics/critical-minerals. 
107. Masia, B., Yang, M., & Cozzani, V. (2024). Risk assessment of ammonia fueled ships: Consequences on human 
health of ammonia releases from damaged fuel storage tanks. ACS Chemical Health & Safety, 31(6), pp. 503-520. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chas.4c00044. 
108. Wyer, K. E., Kelleghan, D. B., Blanes-Vidal, V., Schauberger, G., & Curran, T. P . (2022). Ammonia emissions from 
agriculture and their contribution to fine particulate matter: A review of implications for human health. Journal of 
Environmental Management, 323, 116285. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2022.116285. 
109. International Energy Agency (IEA). (n.d.) Ammonia Technology Roadmap: Towards more sustainable nitrogen 
fertilizer production. https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/6ee41bb9-8e81-4b64-8701-2acc064ff6e4/
AmmoniaTechnologyRoadmap.pdf. 
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
110. Dubai Future Foundation (DFF). (2024, 11 February). Navigating 10 megatrends shaping our future in 2024. 
https://www.dubaifuture.ae/navigating-10-megatrends-shaping-our-future-in-2024. 
111. Sen, A., Oswalia, J., Yadav, S., Vachher, M., & Nigam, A. (2024). Recent trends in nanozyme research and their potential 
therapeutic applications. Current Research in Biotechnology, 7, 100205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crbiot.2024.100205. 
112. Bilal, M., Khaliq, N., Ashraf, M., Hussain, N., (2023). Enzyme mimic nanomaterials as nanozymes with catalytic attributes. 
Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces, 221, 112950. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfb.2022.112950. 
113. Sen, A., Oswalia, J., Yadav, S., Vachher, M., & Nigam, A. (2024). Recent trends in nanozyme research and their potential 
therapeutic applications. Current Research in Biotechnology, 7, 100205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crbiot.2024.100205. 
114. Level Nine. (n.d.). Next-generationcatalysts, inspired by nature. https://www.levelninelabs.com/. 
115. Gust. (n.d.). Nanozyme, Inc. https://gust.com/companies/nanozyme. 
116. Wang, T., Lai, L., Huang, Y., & Su, E. (2024). Nanozyme: An emerging tool for food packaging. Food Control, 
155, 110104. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2023.110104. 
117. Sen, A., Oswalia, J., Yadav, S., Vachher, M., & Nigam, A. (2024). Recent trends in nanozyme research and their potential 
therapeutic applications. Current Research in Biotechnology, 7, 100205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crbiot.2024.100205. 
118. Market Research Future. (n.d.). Nanozyme market size, share, outlook insights 2034. 
https://www.marketresearchfuture.com/reports/nanozyme-market-30279. 
119. Cao, X., Liu, T., Wang, X., Yu, Y., et al. (2024). Recent advances in nanozyme-based sensing technology 
for antioxidant detection. Sensors, 24(20), 6616. https://doi.org/10.3390/s24206616. 
120. Ibid.
121. Tagaras, N., Song, H., Sahar, S., Tong, W., et al. (2024). Safety landscape of therapeutic nanozymes and future research 
directions. Advanced Science, 11(46). https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.202407816. 
122. Zhang, Y., Hu, X., Shang, J., Shao, W., et al. (2022). Emerging nanozyme-based multimodal synergistic therapies in 
combating bacterial infections. Theranostics, 12(13), pp. 5995-6020. https://doi.org/10.7150/thno.73681. 
123. Cao, X., Liu, T., Wang, X., Yu, Y., et al. (2024). Recent advances in nanozyme-based sensing technology for antioxidant 
detection. Sensors, 24(20), 6616. https://doi.org/10.3390/s24206616. 
124. Ibid.
125. Ibid.
126. Wang, P ., Wang, T., Hong, J., Yan, X., & Liang, M. (2020). Nanozymes: A new disease imaging strategy. 
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology, 8. https://doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2020.00015. 
127. American National Standards Institute. (2021, 8 October). With standards, the potential of nanotechnology keeps growing. 
https://www.ansi.org/standards-news/all-news/2021/10/10-8-21-with-standards-the-potential-for-nanotechnology-
keeps-growing. 
128. Dubai Future Foundation (DFF). (2024, 11 February). Navigating 10 megatrends shaping our future in 2024. 
https://www.dubaifuture.ae/navigating-10-megatrends-shaping-our-future-in-2024. 
129. Ebadi, K., Chang, Y., Palieri, M., Stephens, A., et al. (2020). Lamp: Large-scale autonomous mapping and positioning 
for exploration of perceptually-degraded subterranean environments. IEEE International Conference 
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 80-86. https://doi.org/10.1109/icra40945.2020.9197082. 
130. Williams, L.C. (2024, 9 April). Drones, maps, and storm-tracking in the Pacific. Defense One. 
https://www.defenseone.com/defense-systems/2024/04/drones-maps-and-storm-tracking-pacific/395574/?oref=d1-
category-lander-river . 
131. Naratek. (2019, 22 November). Researchers develop robotic ants with Swarm Intelligence. https://www.naratek.com/
en/2019/researchers-develop-robotic-ants-swarm-intelligence. 
132. Yi, L., Deng, X., Yang, L. T., Wu, H., et al. (2021). Reinforcement-learning-enabled partial confident information 
coverage for IOT-based Bridge Structural Health Monitoring. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 8(5), pp. 3108-3119. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/jiot.2020.3028325. 
133. Delheimer, S. (n.d.). Using drones in agriculture and Natural Resources. National Institute of Food and Agriculture. 
https://www.nifa.usda.gov/about-nifa/impacts/using-drones-agriculture-natural-resources. 
134. Federal Communications Commission. (2024, 21 November). FCC ADOPTS ‘C-V2X’ AUTO SAFETY SPECTRUM 
RULES. https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/DOC-407683A1.pdf. 
135. Armeni, I., He, Z.-Y., Zamir, A., Gwak, J., (2019). 3D scene graph: A structure for unified semantics, 3D space, and 
camera. IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV). https://doi.org/10.1109/iccv.2019.00576. 
136. Cadena, C. et al. (2016). Past, Present, and Future of Simultaneous Localization and Mapping: Toward the Robust-Perception 
Age. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1309-1332. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7747236. 
137. Feng, D., et al. (2021). Deep Multi-Modal Object Detection and Semantic Segmentation for Autonomous Driving: 
Datasets, Methods, and Challenges. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 22, no. 3, 
pp. 1341-1360. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9000872. 
138. Rajvanshi, A., et al. (2023). SayNav: Grounding Large Language Models for Dynamic Planning to Navigation 
in New Environments. Cornell University. https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.04077. 
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
139. Pawar, V., Zade, N., Vora, D., Khairnar, V., et al. (2024). Intelligent Transportation System with 5G vehicle-to-everything 
(V2X): Architectures, vehicular use cases, emergency vehicles, current challenges, and Future Directions. IEEE Access, 
12, 183937-183960. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2024.3506815. 
140. Adnan Yusuf, S., Khan, A., & Souissi, R. (2024). Vehicle-to-everything (V2X) in the Autonomous Vehicles Domain – 
A Technical Review of Communication, sensor, and AI Technologies for Road User Safety. Transportation Research 
Interdisciplinary Perspectives, 23, 100980. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trip.2023.100980. 
141. Stone, T. (2020, 19 November). White Paper: Australian research reveals V2x could reduce crashes by 78%. 
Traffic Technology Today. https://www.traffictechnologytoday.com/news/connected-vehicles-infrastructure/white-paper-
australian-research-reveals-connected-talking-cars-could-save-lives.html. 
142. National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). (n.d.). Connected and automated trucks: Transportation 
and Mobility Research. https://www.nrel.gov/transportation/connected-automated-trucks.html. 
143. Adnan Yusuf, S., Khan, A., & Souissi, R. (2024). Vehicle-to-everything (V2X) in the Autonomous Vehicles Domain – 
A Technical Review of Communication, sensor, and AI Technologies for Road User Safety. Transportation Research 
Interdisciplinary Perspectives, 23, 100980. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trip.2023.100980.
144. Pawar, V., Zade, N., Vora, D., Khairnar, V., et al. (2024). Intelligent Transportation System with 5G vehicle-to-everything 
(V2X): Architectures, vehicular use cases, emergency vehicles, current challenges, and Future Directions. IEEE Access, 
12, 183937-183960. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2024.3506815.
145. Ericsson. (n.d.). 5G network coverage outlook. https://www.ericsson.com/en/reports-and-papers/mobility-report/
dataforecasts/network-coverage. 
146. Dubai Future Foundation (DFF). (2024, 11 February). Navigating 10 megatrends shaping our future in 2024. 
https://www.dubaifuture.ae/navigating-10-megatrends-shaping-our-future-in-2024. 
147. Zhao, X., Gunn, S., Christ, M., Fairoze, J., et al. (n.d.). SoK: Watermarking for AI-Generated Content. arxiv. 
https://arxiv.org/html/2411.18479v2. 
148. Google DeepMind. (n.d.). SynthID. https://deepmind.google/technologies/synthid/. 
149. Fernandez, P ., Elsahar, H., Yalniz, I. Z., & Mourachko, A. (n.d.). Video Seal: Open and Efficient Video Watermarking. arvix. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2412.09492. 
150. Bartz, D., & Hu, K. (2023, 21 July). OpenAI, Google, others pledge to watermark AI content for safety, White House 
says. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/technology/openai-google-others-pledge-watermark-ai-content-safety-white-
house-2023-07-21/. 
151. Fernandez, P . et al. (2024, 11 December). Video Seal: Open and Efficient Video Watermarking. Meta. 
https://ai.meta.com/research/publications/video-seal-open-and-efficient-video-watermarking/. 
152. Clegg, N. (2024, 6 February). Labeling AI-generated images on Facebook, Instagram and threads. Meta. 
https://about.fb.com/news/2024/02/labeling-ai-generated-images-on-facebook-instagram-and-threads/. 
153. Partnership on AI. (2024, 19 November). Partnership on AI Unveils New Case Studies from Supporters of Synthetic Media 
Framework: Meta, Microsoft, Thorn, and Truepic. https://partnershiponai.org/nov-2024-synthetic-media-case-studies-
announcement/. 
154. Heitzenrater, C. (2024, 17 January). The case for and against AI Watermarking. Rand. https://www.rand.org/pubs/
commentary/2024/01/the-case-for-and-against-ai-watermarking.html. 
155. Cyberspace Administration of China. (2022). Provisions on the Management of Deep Synthesis of Internet Information 
Services. https://www.cac.gov.cn/2022-12/11/c_1672221949354811.htm. 
156. European Parliament. (2023, 13 December). Generative AI and watermarking. https://www.europarl.europa.eu/thinktank/
en/document/EPRS_BRI(2023)757583. 
157. California Legislative Information. (2024). SB-942 California AI Transparency Act. (2023-2024). 
https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billNavClient.xhtml?bill_id=202320240SB942. 
158. Wu, D. (2025, 14 March). China announces generative ai labeling to cull disinformation. Bloomberg. 
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2025-03-14/china-announces-generative-ai-labeling-to-cull-disinformation. 
159. EU Artificial Intelligence Act. (n.d.). The EU Artificial Intelligence Act. https://artificialintelligenceact.eu/. 
160. EU Artificial Intelligence Act. (2025). Article 99: Penalties. https://artificialintelligenceact.eu/article/99/. 
161. Adobe. Content Credentials overview. (2025, 22 January). https://helpx.adobe.com/creative-cloud/help/content-
credentials.html. 
162. DiBenedetto, C. (2024, 9 May). TikTok’s ai-generated content is getting watermarked. Mashable. 
https://mashable.com/article/tiktok-watermarking-ai-generated-content. 
163. Ai watermarking must be watertight to be effective. (2024). Nature, 634(8035), 753–753. https://doi.org/10.1038/
d41586-024-03418-x 
164. Evsutin, O., & Meshcheryakov, Y. (2020). The use of the blockchain technology and digital watermarking to provide data 
authenticity on a mining enterprise. Sensors, 20(12), 3443. https://doi.org/10.3390/s20123443. 
165. Dubai Future Foundation (DFF). (2024, 11 February). Navigating 10 megatrends shaping our future in 2024. 
https://www.dubaifuture.ae/navigating-10-megatrends-shaping-our-future-in-2024.
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2025
World Economic Forum
91–93 route de la Capite
CH-1223 Cologny/Geneva
Switzerland 
Tel.: +41 (0) 22 869 1212
Fax: +41 (0) 22 786 2744
contact@weforum.org
www.weforum.orgThe World Economic Forum, 
committed to improving 
the state of the world, is the 
International Organization for 
Public-Private Cooperation.

The Forum engages the 
foremost political, business 
and other leaders of society 
to shape global, regional 
and industry agendas.